---
header-id: business-logic-with-service-builder
---

# Business Logic with Service Builder

[TOC levels=1-4]

Once you've
[defined your application's entities](/docs/7-2/appdev/-/knowledge_base/a/creating-a-service-xml)
and
[run Service Builder](/docs/7-2/appdev/-/knowledge_base/a/running-service-builder)
to generate your service and persistence layers, you can begin adding business
logic. Each entity generated by Service Builder contains a model implementation,
local service implementation, and optionally a remote service implementation
class. Your application's business logic can be implemented in these classes.
The generated service layer contains default methods that call CRUD operations
from the persistence layer. Once you've added your business logic, running Service
Builder again regenerates your application's interfaces and makes your new logic
available for invocation.

The heart of your service is its `*LocalServiceImpl` class. This class is your
entity's local service extension point. Local services are invoked from your
application or by other applications running on the same instance as your
application. 

Creating services takes these steps: 

1.  Deciding to Create Local and Remote Services.

2.  Implementing the `add` Method.

3.  Implementing the `update` and `delete` Methods.

4.  Implementing Finder and Counter Methods

5.  Implementing Other Business Logic

6.  Integrating with Liferay's Services.

Start with deciding the service types you need. 

[Defining your object model](/docs/7-2/appdev/-/knowledge_base/a/creating-the-service-xml-file)
involves choosing whether to generate local and or remote service interfaces.
Local services can only be invoked from the Liferay server on which they're
deployed. Remote services are accessible to clients outside of the Liferay
server. Before implementing local or remote services, consider the best
practices described here:

1.  If you plan to have remote services, enable local services too.

2.  Implement your business logic in `*LocalServiceImpl`. 

3.  [Create corresponding remote services methods](/docs/7-2/appdev/-/knowledge_base/a/creating-remote-services)
    in your `*ServiceImpl`.

4.  Use the remote service methods to call the local service, wrapping the calls
    in permission checks. 

5.  In your application, call only the remote services. This ensures that
    your service methods are secured and that you don't have to duplicate
    permissions code.

If you are turning on local or remote services in your `service.xml` file just
now, make sure to
[run Service Builder](/docs/7-2/appdev/-/knowledge_base/a/running-service-builder)
again to generate the service interfaces. 

Now you're ready to implement your business logic. 
