# Creating a Liferay Workspace with Blade CLI [](id=creating-a-liferay-workspace-with-blade-cli)

In this tutorial, you'll learn how to generate a Liferay Workspace using Blade
CLI. The Blade CLI tool you installed in the
[Installing Blade CLI](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/installing-blade-cli)
section provides many different commands to help build and customize Liferay
projects. The first thing you should do before building and customizing projects
is create a Liferay Workspace. Your workspace is the home for all your custom
Liferay projects. Navigate to the folder where you want your workspace and run
the following command:

    blade init [WORKSPACE_NAME]

Initializing a workspace requires no downloading or access to the internet.

If you still plan on using a Plugins SDK and wish to use it in conjunction with
a workspace, navigate to your Plugins SDK root folder and run the following
command:

    blade --update

This command builds a workspace and automatically adds and configures your
current Plugins SDK environment for use inside the workspace. See the
[Using a Plugins SDK From Your Workspace](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/liferay-workspace#using-a-plugins-sdk-from-your-workspace)
section for more information on how to use a Plugins SDK from within a
workspace.

Once your workspace is generated, look at its folder structure. Several folders
and build/properties files were autogenerated: 

- `configs`
- `gradle`
- `modules`
- `themes`
- `build.gradle`
- `gradle.properties`
- `gradlew`
- `settings.gradle`

The build/properties files included in your workspace's root directory sets your
workspace's Gradle properties and facilitates the build processes of your
modules. You can learn more about these generated files/folders in the
[Liferay Workspace](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/liferay-workspace)
tutorial. You'll learn about how to use these folders and properties files throughout the
next few tutorials. 

Next you'll learn about generating and using a @product@ instance from within
your workspace.

## Running a Liferay Instance from Your Workspace [](id=running-a-liferay-instance-from-your-workspace)

As discussed in the 
[Liferay Workspace](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/liferay-workspace)
tutorial, Liferay Workspaces can generate and hold a Liferay Server. This lets
you build/test your plugins against a running Liferay instance. Once you've
properly generated and installed a Liferay server in your workspace, you can
begin using it with the Blade CLI. To start your Liferay instance, run

    blade server start -b

This command starts your Liferay server in a separate window. You also have the
option to run your server in debug mode (`-d`).

Awesome! You have a built-in Liferay server in your workspace and can start the
server using Blade CLI. Next you'll learn how to use a legacy Plugins SDK from
your workspace.

## Configuring a Plugins SDK in Your Workspace [](id=configuring-a-plugins-sdk-in-your-workspace)

Because @product@ 7.0 uses a module-based framework, the current structure of a
Liferay Workspace is centered around module development. There are still,
however, many situations where you must create WAR-style plugins using the
Plugins SDK. Because of this, your workspace can also work with the Plugins SDK.
When configuring your SDK in a workspace, you can take advantage of all the new
functionality workspaces provide and also use the SDK environment that you're
used to.

Running the `blade --update` command converted the Plugins SDK to a workspace
that includes the Plugins SDK. If you created your workspace from scratch
instead with `blade --update`, you'll need to configure your Liferay workspace's
Gradle properties.

If you revisit your workspace's `gradle.properties` file, you'll notice the
Plugins SDK folder is set to `plugins-sdk`. This folder was not generated by
default, so you must create it yourself. In your workspace's root
folder, create the `plugins-sdk` folder. Then copy your legacy Plugins SDK
files into the `plugins-sdk` folder. Lastly, generate its requirements by
running `gradlew tasks`. Once this command successfully downloads all your
Plugins SDK dependencies, it's ready to use in your workspace. For more
information on manually configuring a Plugins SDK, see the
[Using a Plugins SDK from Your Workspace](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/liferay-workspace#using-a-plugins-sdk-from-your-workspace)
section.
