# Invoking Liferay Services from Your Application [](id=invoking-liferay-services-from-your-application)

You can find Liferay's services by searching for them in the Javadocs:
[http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/javadocs/](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/javadocs/).
Below, we'll show you how to search for portal services and portlet services.

Let's start by finding a portal service. 

## Finding Liferay Portal Services [](id=finding-liferay-portal-services)

Liferay's Javadocs are easy to browse and well-organized. Here's how to find the
*Organization* services: 

1. In your browser, open up the Javadocs:
   [http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/javadocs/](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/javadocs/) 

2. Under *Portal Services*, click on the link for the
   `com.liferay.portal.service` package, since the services for the Organization
   entity belong to the *Portal* scope. 

3. Find and click on the `*ServiceUtil` class (in this case,
   `OrganizationLocalServiceUtil`) in the *Class Summary* table or the
   *Classes* list at the bottom of the page. 

That was easy! What if you want to find portlet services? 

## Finding Liferay Plugin Services [](id=finding-liferay-plugin-services)

Searching for one of Liferay's built-in plugin services is also easy. Instead of
clicking the link for the service package of the *portal*, click the link for
the service package of the *portlet*. The portlet service packages use the
naming convention `com.liferay.portlet.[portlet-name].service`, where
`[portlet-name]` is replaced with the actual name of the portlet. 

Here's how you find services for a user's blogs statistics:

1. In your browser, open the Javadocs:
   [http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/javadocs/](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/javadocs/)

2. Under *Portlet Services*, click on the link for the
   `com.liferay.portlet.blogs.service` package in the *Packages* frame, since
   the services are a part of the Blogs portlet. 

3. Find and click on the `*ServiceUtil` class (in this case
   `BlogsStatsUserLocalServiceUtil`) in the *Class Summary* table or the
   *Classes* list. 

Now you're ready to invoke Liferay services. To invoke Liferay services
remotely, your Liferay instance must be configured to allow remote web service
access. Please see the
[Understanding Liferay's Service Security Model](https://dev.liferay.com/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/understanding-liferays-service-security-model) 
tutorial for details.

## Invoking Liferay Services Locally [](id=invoking-liferay-services-locally)

Every Liferay service provides a local interface to clients running in the same
JVM as Liferay Portal. Many local services (`*LocalServiceUtil` classes) are
called by remote services (`*ServiceUtil` classes). The remote classes mask the
complexity of the local service implementations and include permission checks.
The core Liferay services that are provided as part of Liferay Portal were
generated by the same Service Builder tool that you can use in your
applications. You can invoke a remote Liferay service by calling the appropriate
`*LocalServiceUtil` or `*ServiceUtil` class. The following JSP code snippet
demonstrates how to get a list of the most recent bloggers from an organization.
Note that only a local service, not a remote service, is available for
`BlogsStatsUser`.

    <%@ page import="com.liferay.portlet.blogs.service.BlogsStatsUserLocalServiceUtil" %>
    <%@ page import="com.liferay.portlet.blogs.util.comparator.StatsUserLastPostDateComparator" %>
    ...
    <%@
    List statsUsers = BlogsStatsUserLocalServiceUtil.getOrganizationStatsUsers(
        organizationId, 0, max, new StatsUserLastPostDateComparator());
    %>

This JSP code invokes the static method `getOrganizationStatsUsers()` from the
`*LocalServiceUtil` class `BlogsStatsUserLocalServiceUtil`. 

In addition to any services you create using Service Builder, your applications
can access a variety of services built into Liferay. These include the following
services:

- `UserService`: for accessing, adding, authenticating, deleting, and updating
  users. 
- `OrganizationService`: for accessing, adding, deleting, and updating
  organizations. 
- `GroupService`: for accessing, adding, deleting, and updating groups.
- `CompanyService`: for accessing, adding, checking, and updating companies.
- `ImageService`: for accessing images.
- `LayoutService`: for accessing, adding, deleting, exporting, importing, and
  updating layouts. 
- `PermissionService`: for checking permissions.
- `UserGroupService`: for accessing, adding, deleting, and updating user
  groups. 
- `RoleService`: for accessing, adding, unassigning, checking, deleting, and
  updating roles. 

## Invoking Liferay Services Remotely [](id=invoking-liferay-services-remotely)

Many default Liferay services are available as web services. Liferay exposes its
web services via SOAP and JSON web services. If you're running Liferay locally
on port 8080, visit the following URL to browse Liferay's default SOAP web
services:

    http://localhost:8080/api/axis

To browse Liferay's default JSON web services, visit this URL:

    http://localhost:8080/api/jsonws/

By default, the context path is set to `/` which means that core Liferay
services are listed. You can select a different content path to view the
services of a Liferay plugin. E.g., set the context path to `/calendar-portlet`
to view the services of Liferay's Calendar portlet.

Click on the name of a service method to view details about it. The full package
path to the service's `*Impl` class is displayed along with the method's
parameters, return type, and possible exceptions. There's also a form that you
can use to enter values for the method's parameters and actually invoke the
service. Note that you must be logged in a user that has permission to invoke
the service for your service invocation to succeed.

The web interface for JSON web services is very handy for development and
testing. However, Liferay web services are designed to be invoked by client
applications. Liferay's web services APIs can be accessed by many different
kinds of clients, including non-portlet and even non-Java clients. For
information on how to develop client applications that can access Liferay's JSON
web services, please see the
[Working With JSON Web Services](https://dev.liferay.com/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/working-with-json-web-services)
tutorial. For information on how to develop
client applications that access Liferay's SOAP web services, please see the [Working With SOAP Web Services](https://dev.liferay.com/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/working-with-soap-web-services)
tutorial. To learn how to create remote web services for your own application,
please refer to the
[Creating Remote Services](https://dev.liferay.com/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/creating-remote-services)
tutorial. 

For more information on Liferay services, see the Liferay Portal CE Javadocs at
[http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/javadocs/](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/javadocs/)
or the Liferay Portal EE Javadocs included in the Liferay Portal EE
Documentation `.zip` file that you can download from the Customer Portal on
[http://www.liferay.com](http://www.liferay.com). 

