# Creating Structured Web Content [](id=creating-structured-web-content)

Structures are the foundation for web content. They determine which fields are
available to users as they create new items for display. Structures not only
improve manageability for the administrator, they also make it much easier for
users to quickly add content.

For example, say you're managing an online news magazine. All your articles need
to contain the same types of information: a title, a subtitle, an author and one
or more pages of text and images that comprise the body of the article. With 
only simple content creation, you'd have no way to make sure your users entered 
a title, subtitle, and author. You might also get articles that don't match the 
look and feel of your site. If titles are supposed to be navy blue but they 
come in from your writers manually set to light blue, you need to spend time 
reformatting them before they are published.

Structures give you the ability to provide a format for your content so your
writers know what needs to be entered to have a complete article. Using
structures, you can provide a form for your users which spells out exactly what
is required and can be formatted automatically using a template.

You create a structure by adding form controls such as text fields, text boxes,
text areas (HTML), check boxes, select boxes and multi-selection lists. Also,
you can add specialized, Liferay-specific application fields such as an Image
Uploader and Documents and Media right onto the structure. Furthermore, you can
move the elements around by dragging them where you want them. This makes it
easy for you to prototype different orders for your input fields. Additionally,
elements can be grouped together into blocks which can then be repeatable.
Template writers can then write a template which loops through these blocks and
presents your content in innovative ways, such as in sliding navigation bars,
content which scrolls with the user, and more.

Next you'll take a look at how you can create and edit structures through the
Manage Structures interface.
