# Structure Settings [](id=structure-settings)

After you have created a structure and configured its fields, there is
additional configuration that you should be aware of including permissions and
remote access to managing structures.

### Assigning Permissions [](id=assigning-permissions)

Setting permissions on structures is done using the same procedure as
permissions everywhere else in Liferay. Most users should not have the ability
to edit structures. Structures are coupled with templates, which require some
web development knowledge to create. This is why only trusted developers should
be able to create structures and templates. Users, of course, should be able to
view structures. The *View* permission enables them to make use of the
structures to create content.

![Figure 1: You're able to assign structure permissions via the *Actions* button.](../../../../../images/web-content-structure-permissions.png)

You can grant or deny permissions based on Roles and this is the recommended way
to handle permissions for structures.

### WebDAV URL [](id=webdav-url)

The WebDAV URL feature is available for web content structures and templates so
users could upload and organize resources from both a web interface and the file
explorer of their desktop operating system. With the WebDAV URL, site
administrators are capable of adding, browsing, editing, and deleting structures
and templates on a remote server. After you complete your structure, you can
access the WebDAV URL by re-opening the structure or template and clicking the
*Details* section. If you'd like the see WebDAV in action, visit the
[WebDAV Access](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-1/publishing-files#desktop-access-to-documents-and-media)
section.

+$$$

**Note:** Some operating systems require a WebDAV server to be class level 2
(i.e., to support file locking) before allowing files to be read or written. The
Documents and Media library uses a class level 2 WebDAV server but Web Content
structures and templates do not. This means that @product@'s Document and Media
library supports WebDAV file locking but Web Content structures and templates do
not. However, on operating systems which require WebDAV servers to be class
level 2, it's possible to avoid the restriction by using third-party WebDAV
clients (e.g., [Cyberduck](http://cyberduck.ch)).

$$$

Now that you understand what structures are used for, you need to understand the
other half of @product@'s web content management system: templates.
