# Securing Liferay's Remote Services [](id=securing-liferays-remote-services)

@product@ includes a script console which administrators can use to invoke
Liferay's API. See the (not yet written) [Using Liferay's Script Console]()
article for more information. Liferay's API can also be invoked remotely. How
is this possible? @product@ includes a utility called the *Service Builder* which
is used to generate all of the low level code for performing CRUD operations
for entities that are saved to Liferay's database. This utility is further
explained in the (not yet written) tutorial [Service Builder](). Service
Builder generates web service interfaces that can be invoked remotely. Since
Liferay's APIs are generated by Service Builder, the method signatures and
behavior for storing and retrieving Liferay objects are consistent.

Because the actual method calls for retrieving data are the same regardless of
how one gets access to those methods (i.e., locally or through web services),
@product@ provides a consistent interface for accessing portal data that few
other products can match. The actual interfaces for the various services can be
found by navigating to Liferay's JSON web services page:
[http://localhost:8080/api/jsonws](http://localhost:8080/api/jsonws). Before
these services can be invoked, administrators need to enable users to access
these services remotely.

@product@ includes four layers of web service security:

- IP permission layer
- Service access policy layer
- Authentication/verification layer (browser-only):
- User permission layer

Please see the
[Service Access Policies](discover/deployment/-/knowledge_base/7-0/service-access-policies)
documentation for a description of these security layers.

In the default `portal.properties` file, there is a section called **Main
Servlet**. This section defines the security settings for all of the remote
services provided by @product@. Copy this section and paste it into your custom
`portal-ext.properties` file. Then you can edit the default values to configure
the security settings for the Axis Servlet, the Liferay Tunnel Servlet, the
Spring Remoting Servlet, the JSON Tunnel Servlet, and the WebDAV servlet.

By default, a user connecting from the same machine @product@ is running on can
access remote services so long as that user has the permission to use those
services in Liferay's permissions system. Of course, you are not really
"remote" unless you are accessing services from a different machine. @product@
has multiple layers of security when it comes to accessing its services
remotely. Without explicit rights granted for each layer, attempting to invoke
a Liferay API function remotely fails and a remote exception is thrown.

The first layer of web service security that a user needs to get through in
order to call a method from the service layer is servlet security. This is the
IP permission layer listed above. The *Main Servlet* section of the
`portal-ext.properties` file is used to enable or disable access to Liferay's
remote services. In this section of the properties file, there are properties
for each of Liferay's remote services.

You can set each service individually with the security settings that you
require. For example, you may have a batch job which runs on another machine in
your network. This job looks in a particular shared folder on your network and
uploads documents to your site's Documents and Media portlet on a regular basis,
using Liferay's web services. To enable this batch job to get through the first
layer of security, you would modify the `portal-ext.properties` file and put the
IP address of the machine on which the batch job is running in the list for that
particular service. For example, if the batch job uses the Axis web services to
upload the documents, you would enter the IP address of the machine on which the
batch job is running to the `axis.servlet.hosts.allowed` property.  A typical
entry might look like this:

    axis.servlet.hosts.allowed=192.168.100.100, 127.0.0.1, SERVER_IP

If the machine on which the batch job is running has the IP address
`192.168.100.100`, this configuration will allow that machine to connect to
Liferay's web services and pass in user credentials to be used to upload the
documents.

The second layer of web service security is the service access policy layer.
When attempting to invoke a Liferay API function remotely, the function must be
whitelisted by one of the service access policies that apply to the request.

The third layer of security is the authentication/verification layer. This
layer is only applied to a Liferay API function invocation request if the
request is coming from a browser. In this case, the request must include a
valid authentication token.

The fourth and final layer of security is Liferay's permissions system that
protects every Liferay entity. The user account that accesses the services
remotely must have the proper permissions to operate on the objects it attempts
to access. Otherwise, a remote exception is thrown. Portal administrators need
to use Liferay's permissions system to grant access to these resources to the
administrative user account that attempts to operate on them remotely. For
example, suppose that a Documents and Media folder called *Documents* has been
set up in a site. A role has been created called *Document Uploaders* which has
the rights to add documents to this folder. Your batch job will be accessing
Liferay's web services in order to upload documents into this folder. In order
for this to work, you have to call the web service using a user account to
which the *Document Uploaders* role has been assigned (or that has individual
rights to add documents to the folder). Otherwise, you will be prevented from
using the web service.

You can invoke a Liferay web service in a variety of ways. For example, you can
invoke a web service by navigating to a specific URL in your browser, by using
the [cURL](https://curl.haxx.se/) tool, or via JavaScript. Here's an example
URL for a Liferay web service invocation using a browser:

    http://localhost:8080/api/jsonws/user/get-user-by-email-address/company-id/20154/email-address/test%40liferay.com?p_auth=[value]

This Liferay web service invocation returns the user with the email address
`test@liferay.com` in the company (portal instance) with the ID `20154`. Note
that for the web service invocation to succeed, you must supply a correct value
for the `p_auth` URL parameter. You can find such a value by signing in to
@product@, navigating to
[http://localhost:8080/api/jsonws](http://localhost:8080/api/jsonws) and
clicking on any function that appears in the list. Use the value for the
`p_auth` token that appears under the Execute heading. For more examples of
Liferay web service invocations, please see the (not yet written) [JSON Web
Services Invocation Examples]() documentation.

Some methods of invoking Liferay web services (e.g., using
[cURL](https://curl.haxx.se/)) allow you to supply a username and password.
Note that *Password Policies* (covered in the (not yet written)
[User Management]() documentation) can be used in combination with this
feature. If you are enforcing password policies on your users (requiring
passwords to take a certain form, requiring users to change their passwords on
a periodic basis, etc.), any administrative user account which accesses
Liferay's web services in a batch job can have its password expire too.

To prevent this from happening, you can add a new password policy which does not
enforce the password expiration and add your administrative user ID to it. Then
your batch job can run as many times as you need it to and the administrative
user account's password will never expire.

In summary, accessing @product@ remotely requires the successful passing of four
security checks:

1. The IP address must be pre-configured in the server's
   `portal-ext.properties` file.
2. At least one service access policy which applies to the request must have
   the API function being invoked in a whitelist.
3. If a browser is making the web service invocation request, a valid
   authentication token (`p_auth` URL parameter) must be provided.
4. The user ID being used must have permission to access the resources it
   attempts to access.

## Accessing Liferay's JSON Web Services [](id=accessing-liferays-json-web-services)

To see which Liferay service methods are registered and available for use via
JSON web services, open your browser to the following address:

    http://localhost:8080/api/jsonws

The page lists the portal's registered and exposed service methods. Get each
method's details by clicking the method name. You can view the full signature of
each method, all its arguments, the exceptions that can be thrown, and its
Javadoc! Using a simple form from within your browser, you can even invoke the
service method for testing purposes.

To list registered services on a plugin (e.g. a custom portlet), don't forget to
use its context path in your URL:

    http://localhost:8080/[plugin-context]/api/jsonws

This lists the JSON Web Service API for the plugin.

## Accessing Liferay's WSDL [](id=accessing-liferays-wsdl)

After configuring the security settings properly, your first step in obtaining
access to Liferay's remote SOAP web services is to access the WSDL. If you are
on a browser on the same machine @product@ is running on, you can do this by
accessing the following URL:

    http://localhost:[port number]/tunnel-web/axis

If, for example, you are running on Tomcat on port 8080, you would specify this
URL:

    http://localhost:8080/tunnel-web/axis

If you are accessing a web service that was created as part of a portlet plugin,
the URL is similar, but uses the context of your application rather than the
tunnel-web servlet. You can get a list of your Service Builder-generated WSDL
documents by using the URL pattern below:

    http://localhost:8080/your-portlet/axis

If you are on a different machine from the Liferay server, you will need to pass
in your user credentials on the URL to access the WSDL:

    http://[user ID]:[password]@[server name]:[port number]/tunnel-web/axis

In any case, once you successfully browse to this URL, you will see the list of
web services. You can access the WSDL for each service by clicking on the *WSDL*
link next to the name of the service. There are many services; one for each of
the services available from the Liferay API.

Once you click on one of the *WSDL* links, the Web Service Definition Language
document will be displayed. This document can be used to generate client code
in any language that supports it. You can either save the document to your
local machine and then generate the client code that way, or use your tool to
trigger @product@ to generate the document dynamically by using one of the URLs
above. For information about developing applications that leverage Liferay's
remote services, please see the
[Invoking JSON Web Services](develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/invoking-json-web-services)
documentation. <!-- Update link above to 7.0. -->
