# Using the WAB Generator [](id=using-the-wab-generator)

Developers creating applications for @product-ver@ can choose to create them as
Java EE-style Web Application ARchive (WAR) artifacts or as Java ARchive (JAR)
OSGi bundle artifacts. Some plugin developers, however, don't have that
flexibility. Portlets like Spring MVC and JSF must be packaged as WAR artifacts
because their frameworks are designed for Java EE. Therefore, they expect a WAR
layout and require Java EE resources such as the `WEB-INF/web.xml` descriptor.

Liferay provides a way for these WAR-styled plugins to be deployed and treated
like OSGi modules by Liferay's OSGi runtime. They can be converted to *WAB*s.

@product-ver@ supports the OSGi Web Application Bundle (WAB) standard for
deployment of Java EE style WARs. Simply put, a WAB is an archive that has a WAR
layout and contains a `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF` file with the `Bundle-SymbolicName`
OSGi directive. Although the source of the project has a WAR layout, the
artifact filename may end with either the `.jar` or `.war` extension.

Liferay only supports the use of WABs if they've been auto-generated by the WAB
Generator. The WAB Generator transforms a general WAR-style plugin into a WAB
during its deployment process. So what exactly does the WAB Generator do to a
WAR file to transform it into a WAB?

First, the WAB Generator identifies and specifies the plugin's dependencies. It
analyzes the plugin's JSPs and descriptor files to identify the packages the
plugin requires. The descriptor files include `web.xml`, `liferay-web.xml`,
`portlet.xml`, `liferay-portlet.xml`, and `liferay-hook.xml`.  The WAB Generator
adds each package to an `Import-Package` header in the WAB's
`META-INF/MANIFEST.MF` file.

Next, the WAB Generator finds and registers the plugin's extension point
information. It registers portlet extension points declared in `portlet.xml` and
`liferay-portlet.xml` files. It registers extension point implementations
declared in Hook `liferay-hook.xml` files. 

Throughout the process, the WAB Generator creates a WAB file based on the
original WAR file. Consider the following folder structure of a WAR-style
portlet:

    - my-war-portlet
        - src
            - main
                - java
                - webapp
                    - WEB-INF
                        - resources
                        - views
                        - faces-config.xml
                        - liferay-display.xml
                        - liferay-plugin-package.properties
                        - liferay-portlet.xml
                        - portlet.xml
                        - web.xml

When a WAR-style portlet is deployed to @product@ and processed by the WAB
Generator, the portlet's folder structure is transformed to something like this

    - my-war-portlet-that-is-now-a-wab
        - META-INF
            - MANIFEST.MF
        - WEB-INF
            - classes
            - lib
            - resources
            - views
            - faces-config.xml
            - liferay-display.xml
            - liferay-plugin-package.properties
            - liferay-portlet.xml
            - portlet.xml
            - web.xml

The major difference is the addition of the `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF` file. The WAB
Generator automatically generates an OSGi-ready `MANIFEST.MF` file. If you want
to affect the content of the manifest file, you can place BND directives and
OSGi headers directly into the `WEB-INF/liferay-plugin-package.properties` file.
A `bnd.bnd` and/or a build-time plugin (e.g., `bnd-maven-plugin`) should not be
provided for your WAR plugin, because the generated WAB cannot make use of them.

Deploying a WAR to @product@'s WAB Generator follows the same steps as deploying
an OSGi module JAR. Follow the steps below to deploy your WAR to @product@'s
WAB Generator.

1.  Create a WAR-style plugin that follows a similar structure to the one
    outlined above. You can download an example WAR-style portlet
    [here](https://dev.liferay.com/documents/10184/656312/com.liferay.hello.user.jsf.portlet-1.0-SNAPSHOT.war/8cdc236f-2dff-4ba6-b06a-de130c9232b6?download=true),
    for demonstration.

2.  Copy your WAR plugin in your @product@ instance's `deploy` folder.

3.  Navigate to your @product@ instance's `osgi/war` folder and verify your WAR
    is available.

Fantastic! Your WAR was deployed to the WAB Generator and converted to a WAB.
It's now available in the OSGi registry.

If you're still not satisfied and would like to examine the generated WAB JAR,
you can configure your @product@ instance to save them. The WAB JARs are
intermediate files that the Portal Compatibility Layer (PCL) uses to deploy to
Liferay's OSGi runtime framework. They're typically cleaned from your @product@
instance after they've been deployed. You'll learn how to save them for
examination next.

1.  Open your @product@ instance in a file explorer and add a
    `portal-ext.properties` file with the following properties:

        module.framework.web.generator.generated.wabs.store=true
        module.framework.web.generator.generated.wabs.store.dir=${module.framework.base.dir}/wabs

    These properties store your generated WAB into your @product@ instance's
    `osgi/wabs` folder. You can learn more about these properties in the
    [Module Framework Web Application Bundles](@platform-ref@/7.0-latest/propertiesdoc/portal.properties.html#Module%20Framework%20Web%20Application%20Bundles)
    properties section. Restart @product@ for these changes to be recognized.

2.  Insert your WAR plugin in your @product@ instance's `deploy` folder.

3.  Navigate to your @product@ instance's `osgi/wabs` folder and inspect the
    generated WAB.

Awesome! You've seen the WAB Generator in action!

## Related Topics [](id=related-topics)

[Getting Started with JSF Applications](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/getting-started-with-jsf-applications)

[Customizing the Product Menu](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/customizing-the-product-menu)

[Application Configuration](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/application-configuration)
