# Liferay APIs [](id=liferay-ap-1)

This chapter provides an overview of several of the essential Liferay
*application programming interfaces* (*APIs*) available to developers. An API is
a programing interface that can be invoked from your own code, either directly
through a Java invocation or through web services, to perform an action or set
of actions.

Liferay comes with a host of APIs that expose powerful portal and portlet
services. You can access Liferay's built-in *portal* services for such entities
as User, Organization, UserGroup, Company, Role, Permission, ResourcePermission
and Layout. In addition, you can access Liferay's built-in *portlet* services
for such portlets as those for blogs, wikis, assets, social equity, and the
Documents & Media Library.

The APIs can be called via Java method or web service invocations, giving you
flexibility to implement client code in Java or any other language (even a
scripting language such as PHP) that supports web service invocations. The APIs
can be called from within portlet or non-portlet code. You can make calls to the
APIs *locally* from within the portal or *remotely* outside of the portal's
*Java virtual machine* (*JVM*).

This chapter covers the following topics:

- *Invoking the API locally:* Using Liferay services locally, from the same JVM
as the portal.
	
- *Invoking the API remotely:* Using Liferay services in a *remote* manner. This
can involve invoking the API from outside of the portal's JVM, from machines
other than the portal host, or even from the portal host itself.

- *Service Security:* Leveraging the service security layers provided in
Liferay's service oriented architecture (SOA).

-	*SOAP Web Services:* Consuming services via Liferay's SOAP interface.

- *JSON Web Services:* Consuming services via Liferay's JSON service interface.

- *Service Context:* Understanding what the service context is, how it can be
used in services, and how to use it in calling services.

First, let's consider invoking Liferay's services locally.

## Invoking the API locally [](id=invoking-the-api-locally)

Each service provides a local interface to clients running in the same JVM as
the portal. There are two ways to invoke the methods of a service API:

- By using Spring injection, if your app is using Spring and has access to the
portal context.

- By using `-ServiceUtil` classes. These classes hide complexity of the service
implementations and may be a good option if you are not familiar with Spring.

We'll demonstrate invoking a service via its `-ServiceUtil`. But first, how do
we find services? ... By looking them up in the Liferay Portal Javadocs.

For example, here is how you look up the Organization services:

1. In your browser, open up the Javadocs at
[http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.1/javadocs/](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.1/javadocs/).

2. Click on the link for the `com.liferay.portal.service` package in the
*Packages* frame, since the services for the Organization entity belong to the
*portal*.

3. Find and click on the `-ServiceUtil` class (in this case
`OrganizationLocalServiceUtil`) in the class summary table or the list of
classes.

It's just that easy!

Similarly, if you want to search for one of Liferay's built-in portlet services,
no problem. But, when looking up the package, instead of clicking on the link
for the service package of the *portal*, click on the link for the service
package of the *portlet*. The portlet service packages use the naming convention
`com.liferay.portlet.[portlet-name].service`, where `[portlet-name]` is replaced
with the actual name of the portlet.

For example, here is how you look up services for user blogs statistics:

1. In your browser, open up the Javadocs at
[http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.1/javadocs/](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.1/javadocs/).

2. Click on the link for the `com.liferay.portlet.blogs.service` package in the
*Packages* frame, since the services are a part of the *blogs portlet*.

3. Find and click on the `-ServiceUtil` class (in this case
`BlogsStatsUserLocalServiceUtil`) in the class summary table or the list of
classes.

So, now that you know how to look up the service classes, let's look at the
following JSP code snippet that demonstrates how to get a list of the most
recent bloggers from an organization.

    <%@ page import="com.liferay.portlet.blogs.service.BlogsStatsUserLocalServiceUtil" %>
    <%@ page import="com.liferay.portlet.blogs.util.comparator.StatsUserLastPostDateComparator" %>
    ...
    <%@
    List statsUsers = BlogsStatsUserLocalServiceUtil.getOrganizationStatsUsers(
        organizationId, 0, max, new StatsUserLastPostDateComparator());
    %>

This JSP code invokes static method `getOrganizationStatsUsers()` on the
`-LocalServiceUtil` class `BlogsStatsUserLocalServiceUtil`.

---

 ![note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png)**Note:** Invoking the services in this
 way avoids permission checks. So, if you want to ensure permission checks are
 performed, even from a local context, then you should use the remote variant of
 the API.

---

We'll look at invoking services remotely, next.

## Invoking the API remotely [](id=invoking-the-api-remotely)

Liferay services can also be invoked in a *remote* manner. The services API is
available to *remote* clients -- clients running outside of the portal JVM or
clients running on a remote machines. One key aspect of this API is that it
includes security checks. Unless a developer wants to avoid permission checking,
he should develop his client (whether it be local or remote) to always use this
front-end layer.

Liferay's API follows a Service Oriented Architecture
[(SOA)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service-oriented_architecture). The API
supports Java invocation plus a variety of protocols including SOAP, JSON over
HTTP, Burlap, Hessian, ... etc. A limited set of *RESTful* web services, based
on the AtomPub protocol, is also supported -- see the [Portal Atom
Collections](http://www.liferay.com/community/wiki/-/wiki/Main/Portal+Atom+Collections)
wiki by Igor Spasi&#263; for more details. Note too, if you want to use the API
through Remote Procedure Calls
([RPC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call)), you can do so. You
have plenty of good options for leveraging Liferay's API.

Next, we'll step back for a moment and consider the security layers of Liferay's
*service oriented* architecture and how they can be configured.

## Service Security Layers [](id=service-security-layers)

By default, a user connecting from the same machine Liferay is running on can
access remote services so long as that user has permission to use those services
in Liferay's permissions system. Of course, you are not really "remote" unless
you are accessing services from a different machine; but we recommend using the
API in a remote manner to trigger the security checks. Liferay has two layers of
security when it comes to accessing its services remotely. The first layer of
security only applies to clients invoking the API using a remote protocol.
Invoking the API using a remote protocol, without having explicit rights to both
layers, results in a remote exception being thrown and access being denied to
those services. However, if you want to invoke the API using Java invocation,
skip to the the paragraph that refers to the **second layer of security**.

The **first layer of security** a client needs to get through to call a method
from the service layer is *invoker IP filtering*. For example, you may have a
batch job which runs on another machine in your network. This job looks in a
particular shared folder on your network and uploads documents to your site's
Documents and Media portlet on a regular basis, using Liferay's web services. To
enable this batch job to get through the IP filter, the portal administrator
will need to set portal properties appropriately to allow the machine access to
that particular type of service. For example, if the batch job uses the Axis web
services to upload the documents, the portal administrator would need to add the
IP address of the machine on which the batch job is running to the
`axis.servlet.hosts.allowed` property. A typical entry might look like this:

	axis.servlet.hosts.allowed=192.168.100.100, 127.0.0.1, SERVER_IP

If the IP address of the machine on which the batch job is running is listed
with allowable hosts for the service, then that machine is allowed to connect to
Liferay's web services, pass in the appropriate user credentials, and upload the
documents.

![Figure 8.1:  Liferay SOA's first layer of security](../../images/soa-security-layer-1.png)

---

 ![note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png)**Note:** The `portal.properties` file
 resides on the portal host machine and is controlled by the portal
 administrator. Portal administrators can configure security settings for the
 Axis Servlet, the Liferay Tunnel Servlet, the Spring Remoting Servlet, the JSON
 Servlet, the JSON Web Service Servlet, and the WebDAV Servlet. The
 [Properties Reference](http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide/-/ai/configuring-liferay-s-properti-1)
 chapter of *Using Liferay Portal* describes these properties.

---

The **second layer of security** is Liferay's *security model* that it uses for
every object in the portal. The user ID that accesses the services remotely must
have the proper permission to operate on the objects it will be accessing.
Otherwise, a remote exception will be thrown. The Portal Administrator will need
to make use of Liferay's usual means of granting users access to these
resources. For example, say a Documents and Media Library folder called
*Documents* has been set up in a site and a role has been created called
*Document Uploaders* which has the rights to add documents to this folder. Your
batch job will be accessing Liferay's web services to upload documents into this
folder. In order for this to work, you will have to call the web service using
the user ID of a user who is a member of this group (or the user ID of a user
with individual rights to add documents to this folder). Otherwise, the user
will be prevented from using the Web Service.

![Figure 8.2: Liferay SOA's second layer of security](../../images/soa-security-layer-2.png)

The remote services allow specifying the user credentials using HTTP Basic
authentication. Since those credentials are specified unencrypted, it is
recommended to use HTTPS whenever accessing these services from or through an
untrusted network. Most HTTP clients allow specifying the basic authentication
credentials in the URL which is very handy when doing tests.

To call the AXIS web service using credentials, you would use the following URL
syntax:

	http://" + userIdAsString + ":" + password + "@[server.com]:[port]/api/secure/axis/" + serviceName

The user ID is the user's ID from the Liferay database. This may be obtained by
logging in as the user and navigating to the *My Account* page of the control
panel. On this page, the user ID appears below the user's profile picture and
above the birthday field.

For example, to get Organization data using a user with the ID of *2* and a
password of *test*, you would use the following URL:

	http://2:test@localhost:8080/api/secure/axis/Portal_OrganizationService

---

 ![note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png)**Note:** In old Liferay versions you
 could access those services by using `http://localhost:8080/tunnel-web/axis`.
 However, this path has changed in Liferay 6.1. When you enter it, you're
 redirected to the new one.

---

The authorization type specified for your portal's company dictates the
authorization type you must use to access your web service. The portal
administrator can set the security authentication type to either of the
following:

- screen name
- user ID
- email address

It is important to note here how *Password Policies* (see chapter
[Management](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide/-/ai/administering-liferay-port-1)
of *Using Liferay Portal*) can be used in combination with this feature. If the
portal is enforcing password policies on its users (requiring them to change
their passwords on a periodic basis, etc.), any administrative ID which accesses
Liferay's web services in a batch job will have its password expire too.

To prevent this from happening, the portal administrator can add a new password
policy which does not enforce the password expiration and add your
administrative user ID to it. Then your batch job can run as many times as you
need it to, and the administrative ID's password will never expire.

In summary, accessing Liferay remotely requires the successful passing of two
security checks:

1.  The IP address must be pre-configured in the server's portal properties.

2.  The user must have permission to access the related resources.

Next, we'll learn about Liferay's SOAP web services.

## SOAP Web Services [](id=soap-web-services)

Liferay's services also provide access via *Simple Object Access Protocol*
(*SOAP*) over HTTP. SOAP is the *packaging* protocol and HTTP is the *transport*
protocol. For our example, we'll look at the SOAP web service classes for
Liferay's `Company`, `User`, and `UserGroup` portal services to accomplish the
following:

1. List each UserGroup to which user `test` belongs

2. Add a new UserGroup named `MyGroup`

3. Add user `test` to the UserGroup

Here are the SOAP related classes we'll use:

    import com.liferay.portal.model.CompanySoap;
	import com.liferay.portal.model.UserGroupSoap;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.CompanyServiceSoap;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.CompanyServiceSoapServiceLocator;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserGroupServiceSoap;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserGroupServiceSoapServiceLocator;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserServiceSoap;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserServiceSoapServiceLocator;

You can see in the listing a naming convention involving classes with suffixes
`-ServiceSoapServiceLocator`, `-ServiceSoap`, and `-Soap`. The
`-ServiceSoapServiceLocator` class *finds* the `-ServiceSoap` by means of the
service's URL you provide. The `-ServiceSoap` class is the interface to the
services specified in the *Web Services Definition Language* (*WSDL*) file for
each service. Lastly, the `-Soap` classes are the serializeable implementations
of the models. Let's look at how to determine the URLs for these services.

You can view a listing of the services deployed on your portal by opening your
browser to the URL of the format `http://[host]:[port]/api/secure/axis` for your
*secure* services (services requiring user authentication) and the URL of the
format `http://[host]:[port]/api/axis` for your services that do not require
user authentication. For demonstration, we're using *secure* services. Here are
the web services for `UserGroup`:

![Figure 8.3: UserGroup Web Service listing](../../images/wsdl-summary-listing.png)

---

 ![note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png)**Note:** Liferay's developers use a
 tool called Service Builder to expose their services via SOAP automatically. If
 you are interested in using this tool for your own services, find out more
 about Service Builder in chapter *Liferay Frameworks*.

---

Each web service is listed with its name, operations, and a link to its WSDL
file. The WSDL is written in XML and provides a model for describing and
locating the web service.

![Figure 8.4: WSDL Excerpt for the addUserGroup operation of UserGroup](../../images/wsdl-for-user-group-service.png)

As you'll see in the example in the next section, you pass in the WSDL URL along
with your login credentials to the SOAP service locator for your service.

Next, let's invoke the web service!

### SOAP Java Client [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-soap-java-client-0)

A Java web service client can easily be set up using the Eclipse IDE. Here is
how you can do it:

Add a new *Web Service Client* to your Project for each service you plan to
consume in your client code. For the purposes of the client we're going to
build, we'll want to add a *Web Service Client* for the portal's Company, User,
and UserGroup services.

![Figure 8.5: New Web Service Client](../../images/api-new-web-svc-client.png)

When creating each client, you will need to enter the service definition (WSDL)
for the desired service.

For example:
	http://localhost:8080/api/axis/Portal_UserService?wsdl

![Figure 8.6: Service Definition](../../images/api-web-svc-wsdl.png)

With the WSDL specified, Eclipse automatically adds the auxiliary files and
libraries required to consume that web service!

Next, let's look at the code we'll use to locate and invoke operations to add a
new UserGroup named `MyUserGroup` and assign to it a User with screen name
`test`:

	import java.net.URL;

	import com.liferay.portal.model.CompanySoap;
	import com.liferay.portal.model.UserGroupSoap;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.CompanyServiceSoap;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.CompanyServiceSoapServiceLocator;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserGroupServiceSoap;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserGroupServiceSoapServiceLocator;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserServiceSoap;
	import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserServiceSoapServiceLocator;

	public class LiferaySoapClient {
		public static void main(String[] args) {

			try {
				String remoteUser = "test";
				String password = "test";
				String virtualHost = "localhost";
			
				String groupName = "MyUserGroup";

				String serviceCompanyName = "Portal_CompanyService";
				String serviceUserName = "Portal_UserService";
				String serviceUserGroupName = "Portal_UserGroupService";

				long userId = 0;

				// Locate the Company
				CompanyServiceSoapServiceLocator locatorCompany =
					new CompanyServiceSoapServiceLocator();

				CompanyServiceSoap soapCompany =
					locatorCompany.getPortal_CompanyService(
						_getURL(remoteUser, password, serviceCompanyName,
								true));

				CompanySoap companySoap =
					soapCompany.getCompanyByVirtualHost(virtualHost);

				// Locate the User service
				UserServiceSoapServiceLocator locatorUser =
					new UserServiceSoapServiceLocator();
				UserServiceSoap userSoap = locatorUser.getPortal_UserService(
					_getURL(remoteUser, password, serviceUserName, true));

				// Get the ID of the remote user
				userId = userSoap.getUserIdByScreenName(
					companySoap.getCompanyId(), remoteUser);
				System.out.println("userId for user named " + remoteUser +
						" is " + userId);

				// Locate the UserGroup service
				UserGroupServiceSoapServiceLocator locator =
					new UserGroupServiceSoapServiceLocator();
				UserGroupServiceSoap usergroupsoap =
					locator.getPortal_UserGroupService(
						_getURL(remoteUser, password, serviceUserGroupName,
								true));

				// Get the user's user groups
				UserGroupSoap[] usergroups = usergroupsoap.getUserUserGroups(
						userId);

				System.out.println("User groups for userId " + userId +	" ...");
				for (int i = 0; i < usergroups.length; i++) {
					System.out.println("\t" + usergroups[i].getName());
				}

				// Adds the user group if it does not already exist
				String groupDesc = "My new user group";
				UserGroupSoap newUserGroup = null;

				boolean userGroupAlreadyExists = false;
				try {
					newUserGroup = usergroupsoap.getUserGroup(groupName);
					if (newUserGroup != null) {
						System.out.println("User with userId " + userId +
								" is already a member of UserGroup " +
										newUserGroup.getName());
						userGroupAlreadyExists = true;
					}
				} catch (Exception excep) {
					// print cause, but continue
					System.out.println(excep.getLocalizedMessage());
				}

				if (!userGroupAlreadyExists) {
					newUserGroup = usergroupsoap.addUserGroup(
							groupName, groupDesc);
					System.out.println("Added user group named " + groupName);

					long users[] = {userId};
					userSoap.addUserGroupUsers(newUserGroup.getUserGroupId(),
							users);
				}

				// Get the user's user groups
			   usergroups = usergroupsoap.getUserUserGroups(userId);

				System.out.println("User groups for userId " + userId +	" ...");
				for (int i = 0; i < usergroups.length; i++) {
					System.out.println("\t" + usergroups[i].getName());
				}
			}
			catch (Exception e) {
				e.printStackTrace();
			}
		}

		private static URL _getURL(String remoteUser, String password,
			String serviceName, boolean authenicate)
		throws Exception {
			//Unauthenticated url
			String url = "http://localhost:8080/api/axis/" + serviceName;

			//Authenticated url
			if (authenicate) {
				url = "http://" + remoteUser + ":" + password +
					"@localhost:8080/api/secure/axis/" + serviceName;
			}
			return new URL(url);
		}
	}

As a result of running this client you should get output similar to the
following:

	userId for user named test is 10196
	User groups for user 10196 ...
	java.rmi.RemoteException: No UserGroup exists with the key {companyId=10154, name=MyUserGroup}
	Added user group named
	Added user to user group named MyUserGroup
	User groups for user 10196 ...
		MyUserGroup

As you can see, the user had no groups but then was added to UserGroup
`MyUserGroup`.

No worries about the `java.rmi.RemoteException` as it is thrown when invoking
the UserGroup check with `usergroupsoap.getUserGroup(groupName)` because the
UserGroup does not yet exist.

Some things to note about the URL:

- It is *secure* (authenticated) URL for the service. Authentication is done
using HTTP Basic Authentication, which of course is not appropriate for a
production environment, since the password is unencrypted, but is used for
convenience in this example.

-	The screen name and password are passed in as credentials.

- The name of the service (e.g. `Portal_UserGroupService`) is specified at the
end of the URL. Remember, the service name can be found in the web service
listing like the one we looked at previously.

The operations `getCompanyByVirtualHost()`, `getUserIdByScreenName()`,
`getUserUserGroups()`, `addUserGroup()` and `addUserGroupUsers()` are specified
for the `-ServiceSOAP` classes `CompanyServiceSoap`, `UserServiceSoap` and
`UserGroupServiceSoap` in the WSDL files. And information on parameter types,
parameter order, request type, response type, and return type are conveniently
specified in the WSDL for each Liferay web service. It's all there for you!

Next, let's try accomplishing the same behavior by using a client implemented in
PHP.

### SOAP PHP Client [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-soap-php-client-0)

Now, let's say you want write your client in a language other than Java ... no
problem! You can use any language that supports web services invocation.

The following invokes the same operations using PHP and the PHP SOAP Client:

    <?php
        $groupName = "MyGroup2";
        $userName = "test";
        $clientOptions = array(
	        'login' => $userName,
	        'password' => 'test');

        // Add user group

        $userGroupClient = new SoapClient(
	        "http://localhost:8080/api/secure/axis/Portal_UserGroupService?wsdl",
	        $clientOptions);
        $group = $userGroupClient->addUserGroup($groupName, "This is my group",
        	0, 0);
        print "group id for " . $groupName . " is " . $group->userGroupId . "\n";

        // add user to user group

        $companyClient = new SoapClient(
	        "http://localhost:8080/api/secure/axis/Portal_CompanyService?wsdl",
	        $clientOptions);
        $company = $companyClient->getCompanyByVirtualHost("localhost");
        $userClient = new SoapClient(
	        "http://localhost:8080/api/secure/axis/Portal_UserService?wsdl",
	        $clientOptions);
        $userId = $userClient->getUserIdByScreenName($company->companyId,
        	$userName);
        print "user id for " . $userName . " is " . $userId . "\n";

        $users = array($userId);
        $userClient->addUserGroupUsers($group->userGroupId, $users);

        // get and print user groups to which user belongs

        $userGroups = $userGroupClient->getUserUserGroups($userId);
        print "user groups for user " . $userId . " ...\n";
        foreach($userGroups as $k=>$v)
            print ($v->name) . " " . $v->userGroupId . "\n";
    ?>

So, if you'd like to use a language, other than Java, that supports use of SOAP
web services, go ahead and try it out on Liferay's SOAP web services!

Next, we'll explore Liferay's JSON Web Services.

## JSON Web Services [](id=json-web-services)

JSON Web Services provide convenient access to portal service methods by
exposing them as JSON HTTP API. This makes services methods easily accessible
using HTTP requests, not only from JavaScript within the portal, but also from
any JSON-speaking client.

JSON Web Service functionality can be split into the following topics:
registration, configuration, invocation and results. We'll cover each topic
here.

### Registering JSON Web Services [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-registering-json-web-services-0)

Liferay's developers use a tool called *Service Builder* to build services. All
remote-enabled services (i.e. entities with `remote-service="true"` in
`service.xml`) built with Service Builder are exposed as JSON Web Services. When
Service Builder creates each `-Service.java` interface for a remote-enabled
service, the `@JSONWebService` annotation is added on the class level of that
interface. Therefore, *all* of the public methods of that interface become
registered and available as JSON Web Services.

A `-Service` interface is a generated source file which is not to be modified by
by the user directly. Sometimes, however, you need more control over which
methods to expose and/or hide. To do so, just simply configure the
`-ServiceImpl` class of the service. When service implementation class
(`-ServiceImpl`) is annotated with the `@JSONWebService` annotation, the service
interface is ignored and only the service implementation class is used for
configuration. In other words, `@JSONWebService` annotations in service
implementation **override** any JSON Web Service configuration in service
interface.

And that's all! Upon start-up, Liferay Portal scans classes on the classpath for
annotations. The scanning process is optimized so only portal and service JARs
are scanned, as well as class raw bytecode content. Each class that uses the
`@JSONWebService` annotation is loaded and further examined; its methods become
exposed as JSON API. As explained previously, the `-ServiceImpl` configuration
overrides the `-Service` interface configuration during registration.

For example, let's look the `DLAppService`: 

	@JSONWebService
	public interface DLAppService {
	...

It contains the annotation found on portal startup. Notice the following lines
in the console output when the debug log level is set:

	10:55:06,595 DEBUG [JSONWebServiceConfigurator:121] Configure JSON web service actions
	10:55:06,938 DEBUG [JSONWebServiceConfigurator:136] Configuring 820 actions in ... ms

At this point, scanning and registration is done and all service methods (those
of `DLAppService` and of other services) are registered as JSON Web Services.

Custom portlets can be registered and scanned, too, and their services can
become part of the JSON API. Since scanning of portlet services is not enabled
by default, you must add the following servlet definition in the `web.xml` of
your portlet:

	<web-app>

		...

		<servlet>
			<servlet-name>JSON Web Service Servlet</servlet-name>
				<servlet-class>com.liferay.portal.kernel.servlet.PortalClassLoaderServlet</servlet-class>
				<init-param>
					<param-name>servlet-class</param-name>
					<param-value>com.liferay.portal.jsonwebservice.JSONWebServiceServlet</param-value>
				</init-param>
			<load-on-startup>0</load-on-startup>
		</servlet>
		<servlet-mapping>
			<servlet-name>JSON Web Service Servlet</servlet-name>
			<url-pattern>/api/jsonws/*</url-pattern>
		</servlet-mapping>
		<servlet-mapping>
			<servlet-name>JSON Web Service Servlet</servlet-name>
			<url-pattern>/api/secure/jsonws/*</url-pattern>
		</servlet-mapping>

		...

	</web-app>

This enables the servlet to scan and register your portlet's JSON Web Services.

#### Mapping and naming conventions [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-mapping-and-naming-conventions-0)

Mapped URLs of exposed service methods are formed using the following naming
convention:

	http://[server]:[port]/api/jsonws/[service-class-name]/[service-method-name]

where:

+ **service-class-name** is the name generated from service class name, by
removing the `Service` or `ServiceImpl` suffix and converting it to a lowercase
name.
+ **service-method-name** is generated from the service method name, by
converting the camel-case method name to a lowercase separated-by-dash name.

For example, the following service method ...

	@JSONWebService
	public interface UserService {
		public com.liferay.portal.model.User getUserById(long userId) {...}

... is mapped to the following URL:

	http://localhost:8080/api/jsonws/user-service/get-user-by-id

Each service method is also bound to one HTTP method type. All methods having
names starting with `get`, `is` or `has` are assumed to be read-only methods and
are therefore mapped as GET HTTP methods, by default. All other methods are
mapped as POST HTTP methods.

Non-public service methods require the user to be registered before invoking the
method. For those calls, users must specify a URL of the following convention:

	http://[server]:[port]/api/secure/jsonws/[service-class-name]/[service-method-name]

Note the `secure` part of the URL.

#### Listing available JSON Web Services [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-listing-available-json-web-services-0)

To overview a service and verify which service methods are registered and
available, you can get a service listing in your browser by opening the base
address:

	http://localhost:8080/api/jsonws

The resulting page lists all registered and exposed service methods of the
portal. You can see more details of each method by clicking the method name. For
example, you can see the full signature of the service method, list of all its
arguments, list exceptions that can be thrown, and even read its Javadoc!
Moreover, you can even invoke the service method for testing purposes using
simple form right from within your browser.

To list registered services on a portlet, don't forget to use portlet context
path:

	http://localhost:8080/[portlet-context]/api/jsonws

This will list the JSON Web Service API for the portlet.

#### More on registration [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-more-on-registration-0)

As said, you can control registration by using annotations in your
`-ServiceImpl` class. This overrides any configuration defined in the interface.
Moreover, you can fine-tune which *methods* are visible/hidden using annotations
at the method level.

##### Ignoring a method [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-ignoring-a-method-0)

To ignore a method from being exposed as a service, just annotate the method
with:

	@JSONWebService(mode = JSONWebServiceMode.IGNORE)

Any methods annotated like this do not become part of the JSON Web Service API.

##### HTTP method name and URL [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-http-method-name-and-url-0)

It is also possible to define custom HTTP method names and URL names, using a
similar annotation at the method level.

	@JSONWebService(value = "add-file-wow", method = "PUT")
	public FileEntry addFileEntry(

In this example, the `DLApp` service method `addFileEntry` is mapped to URL
method name `add-file-wow`. The complete URL is actually
`http://localhost:8080/api/jsonws/dlapp/add-file-wow` and can be accessed using
the PUT HTTP method.

If the URL name starts with a slash character (`/`), only the method name is
used to form the service URL; the class name is ignored.

	@JSONWebService("/add-something-very-specific")
	public FileEntry addFileEntry(

Similarly, you can change the class name part of the URL, by setting the value
in class-level annotation:

	@JSONWebService("dla")
	public class DLAppServiceImpl extends DLAppServiceBaseImpl {

This maps all the service methods of the class to URL class name `dla` instead
of the `dlapp` default.

##### Manual registration mode [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-manual-registration-mode-0)

Up to now, it is expected most of the service methods are going to be exposed;
that only specific methods are to be hidden (the *blacklist* approach). But
sometimes you might need a different behavior: to explicitly specify only those
methods that are to be exposed (*whitelist* approach). This is possible, too,
using so-called *manual mode* on class-level annotation. Then, it is up to you
annotate only those methods which are to be exposed.

Then you can annotate only methods that have to be exposed.

	@JSONWebService(mode = JSONWebServiceMode.MANUAL)
	public class DLAppServiceImpl extends DLAppServiceBaseImpl {
		...
		@JSONWebService
		public FileEntry addFileEntry(

Now only the `addFileEntry` method and any other method annotated with
`@JSONWebService` are to be part of the JSON Web Service API; all other methods
of this service are to be excluded from the API.

Next, let's take a look at portal configuration options that apply to JSON Web
Services.

### Portal Configuration of JSON Web Services [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-portal-configuration-of-json-web-services-0)

JSON Web Services are enabled on Liferay Portal by default but can be easily
disabled by specifying the following portal property setting:

	json.web.service.enabled=false

#### Strict HTTP methods [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-strict-http-methods-0)

JSON Web Service services are, by default, mapped to either GET or POST HTTP
methods. If a service method has a name that starts with `get`, `is` or `has`,
the service is assumed to be read-only and is bound to the GET method; otherwise
it is bound to POST.

By default, the portal does not check HTTP methods when invoking a service call;
that is, the portal works in "non-strict http method" mode as services may be
invoked using any HTTP method. If you need the strict mode, you can set it with
portal property:

	jsonws.web.service.strict.http.method=true

When using strict mode, you must use the correct HTTP methods in calling service
methods.

#### Disabling HTTP methods [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-disabling-http-methods-0)

When strict HTTP method mode is enabled, you can even filter web service access
based on HTTP methods used by the services. For example, you can set the portal
JSON Web Services to work in read-only mode by disabling HTTP methods other than
GET. For example:

	jsonws.web.service.invalid.http.methods=DELETE,POST,PUT

Now all requests that use HTTP methods from the list above are simply ignored.

#### Controlling public access [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-controlling-public-access-0)

Each service method determines for itself whether it can be executed by
unauthenticated users and whether a user has adequate permission for the chosen
action. Most of portal's read-only methods are open to public access.

If you are concerned about the security, it is possible to additionally restrict
the access to exposed JSON API for public access. For this reason, there is a
property that specifies a comma delimited list of public methods that can be
accessed by unauthenticated users.

	jsonws.web.service.public.methods=*

Wildcards are supported, so, for example, you can simply set `get*,has*,is*` to
only enable public access to read-only methods; additionally securing all other
JSON methods. To disable access to all exposed methods specify an empty value or
to enable access to all exposed methods specify `*`.

Lastly, let's consider how to invoke JSON Web Services.

### Invoking JSON Web Services [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-invoking-json-web-services-0)

JSON Web Services can be invoked in several ways depending on how their
parameters (i.e. method arguments) are passed in. But before we dive into
different ways of passing parameters, it's important to understand how your
invocation is matched to a method.

#### Matching service methods [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-matching-service-methods-0)

It is important to understand how calls to service methods are matched,
especially when a service method is overloaded.

The general rule is that besides the method name, you must provide **all**
parameters for that service method. Even if some parameter is to be `null`, you
must still provide it.

Note that how parameters are provided (as part of the URL line, as request
parameters, etc.) is not important nor is the order of the parameters.

An exception to the rule of *all* parameters being required, is when using
numeric *hints* to match methods. Let's look at using hints next.

#### Using hints [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-using-hints-0)

It is possible to add numeric hints that specify how many method arguments a
service has. Hints are added as numbers separated by a dot in the method name.
For example:

	/foo/get-bar.2/param1/123/-param2

Here, the `.2` is a hint, so only service methods with 2 arguments will be
matched, others will be ignored for matching.

One important difference when a hint is specified, is now you do not have to
specify all of the parameters. All missing arguments are treated as `null`.
Therefore, the previous example may be called with ...

	/foo/get-bar.2/param1/123

... and `param2` will automatically be set to `null`.

#### Passing parameters as part of URL path [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-passing-parameters-as-part-of-url-path-0)

Parameters can be passed as part of the URL path. After the service URL, you can
append methods parameters in name/value pairs. Parameter names must be formed
from method argument names by converting them from camel-case to lowercase
separated-by-dash names. Example:

	http://localhost:8080/api/secure/jsonws/dlapp/get-file-entries/repository-id/10172/folder-id/0

Parameters may be given in **any** order; it's not necessary to follow the order
in which the arguments specified in the method signatures.

When a method name is overloaded, the *best match* will be used: The method that
contains the least number of undefined arguments is invoked.

#### Passing parameters as URL query [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-passing-parameters-as-url-query-0)

Parameters can be passed as request parameters, too. The difference is parameter
names are specified as is (e.g. camel-case) and are set equal to their argument
values:

	http://localhost:8080/api/secure/jsonws/dlapp/get-file-entries?repositoryId=10172&folderId=0

As with passing parameters as part of a URL path, the parameter order is not
important, the *best match* rule applies for overloaded methods, etc.

#### Mixed way of passing parameters [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-mixed-way-of-passing-parameters-0)

Parameters can be passed in a mixed way: some can be part of the URL path and
some can be specified as request parameters.

#### Type conversion of the parameters [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-type-conversion-of-the-parameters-0)

Parameter values are sent as strings using the HTTP protocol. Before a matching
Java service method is invoked, each parameter value is converted from a string
to its target Java type. We use a 3rd party open-source library to convert each
object to its appropriate common type. Of course, it is possible to add or
change the conversion for certain types; but we'll just cover how the
conversions work by as-is.

Conversion for common types (`long`, `String`, `boolean`, etc.) is
straightforward. All dates can be given in milliseconds. Locales, can be passed
as locale names (e.g. `en` and `en_US`). To pass in an array of numbers, send a
string of comma-separated numbers (e.g. string `4,8,15,16,23,42` can be
converted to `long[]` type). You get the picture!

Arguments can be of type `List` or `Map`, too! To pass a `List` argument, send a
JSON array. To pass a `Map` argument, send a JSON object. The conversion then is
done in two steps:

*Step 1 - JSON deserialization - * JSON arrays are converted into `List<String>`
and JSON objects are converted to `Map<String, String>`. Note, due to security
reasons, it is forbidden to instantiate any type within JSON deserialization.

*Step 2 - Generification - * Each `String` element of the `List` and `Map` is
converted to its target type (the argument's Java generics type specified in the
method signature). Note, this step is only done if the Java argument type uses
generics.

For example, let's consider the conversion of string array `[en,fr]` as JSON web
service parameters for a `List<Locale>` Java method argument type:

*Step 1 - JSON deserialization - * The JSON array is deserialized to a
`List<String>` containing strings `en` and `fr`.

*Step 2 - Generification - * Each string is converted to the `Locale` (the
generics type), resulting in the `List<Locale>` Java argument type.

#### Sending NULL values [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-sending-null-values-0)

To pass a `null` value for an argument, simply prefix the parameter name with a
dash `-`. For example:

	.../dlsync/get-d-l-sync-update/company-id/10151/repository-id/10195/-last-access-date

Here the `last-access-date` parameter is interpreted as `null`.

Null parameters, therefore, do not have specified values. Of course, null
parameters do not have to be the last in the URL, as in this example. When a
null parameter is passed as a request parameter, its value is ignored and `null`
is used instead:

	<input type="hidden" name="-last-access-date" value=""/>

When using JSON RPC (see below), null values may be sent explicitly, even
without a prefix. For example:

	"last-access-date" : null

#### Parameters encoding [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-parameters-encoding-0)

Although often forgotten, there is a difference between URL encoding and query
(i.e. request parameters) encoding. An illustrative example of this is the
difference in how the space character is encoded. When the space character is
part of the URL path, it is encoded as `%20`; when it is part of the query it is
encoded as plus sign (`+`).

Furthermore, all of these rules for encoding apply to international (non-ascii)
characters, as well. Since Liferay Portal works in UTF-8 mode, parameter values
must be encoded as UTF-8 values. However, the portal itself is not responsible
for decoding request URLs and request parameter values to UTF-8. This task is
done by the web-server layer (Tomcat, Apache, etc.). When accessing services
through JSON-RPC, encoding parameters to UTF-8 is not enough -- we also need to
send the encoding type in a Content-Type header (e.g. `Content-Type :
"text/plain; charset=utf-8"`).

For example, let's pass the value "&#1057;&#1091;&#1087;&#1077;&#1088;" ("Super"
in Cyrillic) to some JSON Web Service method. This name first has to be
converted to UTF-8 (resulting in array of 10 bytes) and then encoded for URLs or
request parameters. The resulting value is the string
`%D0%A1%D1%83%D0%BF%D0%B5%D1%80` that can be passed to our service method. When
received, this value is first going to be translated to an array of 10 bytes
(URL decoded) and then converted to a UTF-8 string of the 5 original characters.

#### Sending files as arguments [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-sending-files-as-arguments-0)

Files can be uploaded using multipart forms and requests. Example:

	<form action="http://localhost:8080/api/secure/jsonws/dlapp/add-file-entry" method="POST" enctype="multipart/form-data">
	        <input type="hidden" name="repositoryId" value="10172"/>
	        <input type="hidden" name="folderId" value="0"/>
	        <input type="hidden" name="title" value="test.jpg"/>
	        <input type="hidden" name="description" value="File upload example"/>
	        <input type="hidden" name="changeLog" value="v1"/>
	        <input type="file" name="file"/>
	        <input type="submit" value="addFileEntry(file)"/>
	</form>

As you see, it's a common upload form that invokes the `addFileEntry` method of
the `DLAppService` class.

#### JSON RPC [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-json-rpc-0)

JSON Web Service may be invoked using [JSON RPC](http://json-rpc.org/). A good
part of JSON RPC 2.0 specification is supported in Liferay JSON Web Services.
One limitation is parameters may be passed only as *named* parameters;
positional parameters are not supported, as there are too many overloaded
methods for convenient use of positional parameters.

Here is an example of invoking a JSON web service using JSON RPC:

	POST http://localhost:8080/api/secure/jsonws/dlapp
	{
		"method":"get-folders",
		"params":{"repositoryId":10172, "parentFolderId":0},
		"id":123,
		"jsonrpc":"2.0"
	}

#### Default parameters [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-default-parameters-0)

When accessing *secure* JSON web services (user has to be authenticated), some
parameters are made available to the web services by default. They need not to
be specified explicitly, unless you want to change their values to something
other than their defaults.

Default parameters are:

+ `userId` - id of authenticated user
+ `user` - full User object
+ `companyId` - users company
+ `serviceContext` - empty service context object 

#### Object parameters [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-object-parameters-0)

Most services accept simple parameters: numbers, strings etc. However, sometimes
you need to provide an object (a non-simple type) as a service parameter.

Similar to specifying null parameters by using the `-` prefix, to create an
instance of an object parameter, just prefix the parameter name with a plus
sign, `+`, without any parameter value at all. For example:

	/jsonws/foo/get-bar/zap-id/10172/start/0/end/1/+foo

or as a request parameter (note, the `+` sign must be encoded!):

	/jsonws/foo/get-bar?zapId=10172&start=0&end=1&%2Bfoo

or

	<input type="hidden" name="+foo" value=""/>

If a parameter is an abstract class or an interface, it can't be instantiated as
such. Instead, a concrete implementation class must be specified to create the
argument value. This can be done by specifying the `+` prefix before the
parameter name followed by specifying the concrete implementation class. For
example:

	/jsonws/foo/get-bar/zap-id/10172/start/0/end/1/+foo:com.liferay.impl.FooBean

or

	<input type="hidden" name="+foo:com.liferay.impl.FooBean" value=""/>

The examples above specify that a `com.liferay.impl.FooBean` object, presumed to
implement the class of the parameter named `foo`, is to be created.

A concrete implementation can be set as a value, too! For example:

	<input type="hidden" name="+foo" value="com.liferay.impl.FooBean"/>

or in JSON RPC:

	"+foo" : "com.liferay.impl.FooBean"

All these examples specify a concrete implementation for `foo` service method
parameter.

#### Inner Parameters [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-inner-parameters-0)

In many cases, you'll need to populate objects that are passed as parameters. A
good example is a default parameter `serviceContext` of type `ServiceContext`
(see the *Service Context* section in this chapter). Sometimes, you need to set
some of the inner properties (i.e. fields) of the `ServiceContext`, such as:
`addGroupPermissions`, `scopeGroupId`, etc., to make an appropriate call to a
JSONWS.

To pass inner parameters, just specify them using a 'dot' notation. That is,
specify the name of the parameter, followed by a dot `.`, followed by the name
of the inner parameter. For example, with regards to the `ServiceContext` inner
parameters you can provide: `serviceContext.addGroupPermissions`,
`serviceContext.scopeGroupId` parameters, together with other parameters of your
web service call. They will be recognized as inner parameters (with a dot in the
name) and their values will be *injected* into existing parameters, before the
API service method is executed.

Inner parameters are not counted as *regular* parameters for matching methods
and are ignored during matching.

---

 ![tip](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png)**Tip:** Use inner parameters with object
 parameters to set inner content of created parameter instances!

---

### Returned values [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-returned-values-0)

No matter how a JSON web service is invoked, it returns a JSON string that
represents the service method result. Any returned objects are *loosely*
serialized to a JSON string and returned to the caller.

Let's take a look a some returned values from calls to services. In fact, let's
create a UserGroup as we did in our previous SOAP web service client examples.
To make it easy, we'll use the test form provided with the JSON web service in
our browser.

1.	Open your browser to the JSON web service method that adds a UserGroup:

		http://127.0.0.1:8080/api/jsonws?signature=/usergroup/add-user-group-2-name-description
		
	or navigate to it by starting at `http://127.0.0.1:8080/api/jsonws`,
	scrolling down to the section for *UserGroup* and clicking *add-user-group*.

2. Fill in the *name* field to "MyUserGroup3" and the *description* to some
arbitrary value string like "Created using JSON WS".

3.	Click *Invoke* to get a result similar to the following:

		{"addedByLDAPImport":false,"companyId":10154,"description":"Created using JSON WS","name":"MyUserGroup33","parentUserGroupId":0,"userGroupId":13162}

Notice the JSON string returned represents the `UserGroup` object you just
created. The object has been serialized into a JSON string. As a starting point
for understanding JSON strings, go to [json.org](http://www.json.org/).

To find out how to serialize Java objects, maps and lists, check out article
[JSON
Serialization](http://www.liferay.com/community/wiki/-/wiki/Main/JSON+Serialization)
by Igor Spasi&#263;.

### Common JSON WebService errors [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-common-json-webservice-errors-0)

While working with JSON Web Services, you may encounter some of the common
errors described in the following subsections.

#### Missing value for parameter [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-missing-value-for-parameter-0)

This error means you didn't pass a parameter value along with the parameter name
in your the URL path. The parameter value must follow the parameter name in the
URL path.

Here is an example, the URL path

	/api/jsonws/user/get-user-by-id/userId

specifies the parameter named `userId`, but it does not specify the parameter's
value. To resolve this error, simply provide the parameter value after the
parameter name:

	/api/jsonws/user/get-user-by-id/userId/173

#### No JSON web service action associated [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-no-json-web-service-action-associated-0)

This is error means no service method could be matched with the provided data
(method name and argument names). This can be due to various reasons: arguments
may be misspelled, the method name may be formatted incorrectly, etc. Since JSON
web services reflect the underlying Java API, any changes in the respective Java
API will automatically be propagated to the JSON web services. For example, if a
new argument is added to a method or an existing argument is removed from a
method, the parameter data must match that of the new method signature.

#### Unmatched argument type [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-unmatched-argument-type-0)

This error appears when you try to instantiate a method argument using an
incompatible argument type.

### JSON Web Services Invoker [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-json-web-services-invoker-0)

Using JSON Web Services is easy, you send a request that defines a service
method and parameters and you receive the result as JSON object. But you may
need to use JSON Web Services more pragmatically.

Consider the following example: You are working with two related objects, a
`User` and its corresponding `Contact`. With simple JSON Web Service calls, you
first call some user service to get the user object and then you call the
contact service using the contact ID from the user object. So you end up sending
two HTTP requests to get two JSON objects that are not even bound together;
there is no contact information in the user object (i.e. no `user.contact`).
Obviously, this approach has some impact on performance (sending two HTTP calls)
and on usability (manually managing the relationship between two objects).
Wouldn't it be nice if you had an easy-to-use tool to address these problems?
Well, you do -- the *JSON Web Service Invoker*.

Liferay's JSON Web Service Invoker helps you optimize your use of JSON Web
Services. In the following sections, we'll show you how.

#### A simple Invoker call [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-a-simple-invoker-call-0)

The Invoker is accessible on the fixed address:

	http://[address]:[port]/api/jsonws/invoke

It only accepts one request parameter: `cmd` -- the Invoker's command. If the
command request parameter is missing, the request body is used as the command.
So, basically, you can specify the command by either using the request parameter
`cmd` or the request body.

The Invoker command is a plain JSON map that describes how JSON Web Services are
to be called and how the results are to be managed. Here is an example of how to
call a simple service using the Invoker:

	{
		"/user/get-user-by-id": {
			"userId": 123,
			"param1": null
		}
	}

As you can see, the service call is defined as a JSON map. The key specifies the
service URL (i.e. the service method to be invoked) and the key's value
specifies a map of service parameter names (i.e. `userId` and `param1`) and
their values. In the example above, the retrieved user is returned as a JSON
object. Moreover, since the command is a JSON string, null values can be
specified explicitly using the `null` keyword. However, if you so choose, you
can still use the less natural convention for specifying a null parameter that
requires a dash before the parameter name and an explicit empty value (e.g.
`"-param1": ''`).

Note, the example Invoker call is identical to the following standard JSON Web
Service call:

	/user/get-user-by-id?userId=123&-param1

Before we dive into more features, let's learn how to use variables with the
Invoker.

#### Invoker variables [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-invoker-variables-0)

Variables are used to reference objects returned from service calls. Variable
names must start with a `$` (dollar sign) prefix. In our previous example, the
service call returned a user object that can be assigned to a variable:

	{
		"$user = /user/get-user-by-id": {
			"userId": 123,
		}
	}

Here, the variable `$user` holds the returned user object. You can reference the
user's contact ID using the syntax `$user.contactId`.

#### Nested service calls [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-nested-service-calls-0)

With nested service calls, you can magically bind information from related
objects together in a JSON object. This feature allows you to not only call
other services within the same HTTP request, but also nest returned objects in a
convenient way. See it in action:

	{
		"$user = /user/get-user-by-id": {
			"userId": 123,
			"$contact = /contact/get-contact-by-id": {
				"@contactId" : "$user.contactId"
			}
		}
	}

This command defines two service calls in which the contact object returned from
the second service call is nested in (i.e. injected into) the user object, as a
property named `contact`. Finally, we can bind the user and its contact
information together!

Let's analyze this command example to consider what the JSON Web Service Invoker
does in the background within this single HTTP request:

+ Calls the Java service mapped to `/user/get-user-by-id` passing in a value for
the `userId` parameter
+ Assigns the resulting user object to variable `$user`
+ Proceeds with invoking nested calls
+ Calls the Java service mapped to `/contact/get-contact-by-id` using
`contactId` parameter, with `$user.contactId` value from `$user` object
+ Assigns the resulting contact object to variable `$contact`
+ Injects the contact object referenced by `$contact` into the user object's
property named `contact`

One remark: you need to *flag* parameters that take values from existing
variables. Flagging is done using the `@` prefix before the parameter name.

#### Filtering results [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-filtering-results-0)

Many of Liferay Portal's model objects are rich with properties. But, you may
only need a handful of an object's properties for your business logic. By
reducing the number of properties returned in an object, you can minimize the
network bandwith used by your web service invocation. Good news! With the JSON
Web Service Invoker you can define a *white-list* of properties to include only
specific properties in the object returned from your web service call. It's
simple:

	{
		"$user[firstName,emailAddress] = /user/get-user-by-id": {
			"userId": 123,
			"$contact = /contact/get-contact-by-id": {
				"@contactId" : "$user.contactId"
			}
		}
	}

In this example, the returned user object has only the `firstName` and the
`emailAddress` properties (and, of course, the `contact` property). You specify
*white-list* properties in square brackets (`[...]`) immediately following the
name of your variable.

#### Batching calls [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-batching-calls-0)

As mentioned previously, nesting service calls allows you to invoke multiple
services within a single HTTP request. Using a single request for multiple
service calls is helpful for gathering related information from the service call
results. But you can also use a single request to invoke unrelated service
calls. The Invoker command allows you to *batch* service calls together to
improve performance. Again, it's simple, just pass a JSON array of commands:

	[
		{/* first command */},
		{/* second command */}
	]

The result is a JSON array populated with results from each of the commands. The
commands are collectively invoked in a single HTTP request, one after another.

Well, you've just added some powerful tools to your toolbox by learning how to
leverage JSON Web Services in Liferay. Good job!

Next, let's consider the `ServiceContext` class used by so many Liferay services
and how it can be helpful to use in your services.

## Service Context [](id=service-conte-1)

The `ServiceContext` class is a parameter class to be used in passing contextual
information for a service. By using a parameter class, it is possible to
consolidate many different methods with different sets of optional parameters
into a single, easier to use method. The class also aggregates information
necessary for transversal features such as permissioning, tagging,
categorization, etc.

This section covers:

-	The Service Context fields

-	Creating and populating a Service Context

-	Accessing Service Context data

First, we'll take a look at the fields of the `ServiceContext` class.

### Service Context Fields [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-service-context-fields-0)

There are a good number of fields found in `ServiceContext`. The best
descriptions of these fields are found in the Javadoc comments for of their
corresponding *getter* methods found at
[http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.1/javadocs-all/com/liferay/portal/service/ServiceContext.html](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.1/javadocs-all/com/liferay/portal/service/ServiceContext.html).
But what may also be helpful is the following categorical listing of the fields:

-	Actions:
	-	`_command`
	-	`_workflowAction`

-	Attributes:
	-	`_attributes`
	-	`_expandoBridgeAttributes`

-	Classification:	
	-	`_assetCategoryIds`
	-	`_assetTagNames`

-	IDs and Scope:
	-	`_companyId`
	-	`_portletPreferencesIds`
	-	`_plid`
	-	`_scopeGroupId`
	-	`_userId`
	-	`_uuid`

-	Language:
	-	`_languageId`

-	Miscellaneous:
	-	`_headers`
	-	`_signedIn`

-	Permissions:
	-	`_addGroupPermissions`
	-	`_addGuestPermissions`
	-	`_deriveDefaultPermissions`
	-	`_groupPermissions`
	-	`_guestPermissions`

-	Resources:
	-	`_assetEntryVisible`
	-	`_assetLinkEntryIds`
	-	`_createDate`
	-	`_indexingEnabled`
	-	`_modifiedDate`

-	URLs, paths and addresses:
	-	`_currentURL`
	-	`_layoutFullURL`
	-	`_layoutURL`
	-	`_pathMain`
	-	`_portalURL`
	-	`_remoteAddr`
	-	`_remoteHost`
	-	`_userDisplayURL`

In case you are wondering how the `ServiceContext` fields get populated, we're
going to look at that next.

### Creating and Populating a Service Context  [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-creating-and-populating-a-service-context--0)

All of the fields of the `ServiceContext` class are optional, although your
services that store any type of content will require you to specify at least the
scope group ID. Here is a simple example of how to create a `ServiceContext`
instance and pass it as a parameter to a service API using Java:

		ServiceContext serviceContext = new ServiceContext();
		serviceContext.setScopeGroupId(myGroupId);
		...
		BlogsEntryServiceUtil.addEntry(...., serviceContext);

If you are invoking the service from a servlet, a Struts action or any other
front-end class which has access to the `PortletRequest`, use one of the
`ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(...)` methods. These methods create the
`ServiceContext` object and fill it with all the necessary values automatically.
If you are invoking the service from a servlet, the above example could be
rewritten as follows:

		ServiceContext serviceContext =
				ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(BlogsEntry.class.getName(),
				portletRequest);
		BlogsEntryServiceUtil.addEntry(..., serviceContext);

To see an example of how to populate a `ServiceContext` with information from a
request object, check out the code of the
`ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(...)` methods. Not only do the methods
demonstrate setting parameters such as scope group ID, company ID, language ID,
etc., but they also demonstrate accessing and populating more complex context
parameters such as tags, categories, asset links, headers, and the attributes
parameter. Note, by calling `ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(String className,
PortletRequest portletRequest)`, you can assure your expando bridge attributes
are also set on the `ServiceContext`.

You're not limited to using only Java with ServiceContext; you can use
ServiceContext from other languages like JavaScript. In fact, since our API can
be invoked from JavaScript, it is often required to pass the ServiceContext from
JavaScript to the server, and this can be done in a very simple way -- by
passing the ServiceContext as any other JavaScript object. There are plenty of
examples of this in the JavaScript code of Liferay's portlets. Here is an
example from `[liferay-portal]/portal-web/html/portlet/journal/js/main.js` that
demonstrates using ServiceContext in calling the `updateStructure` method of the
JournalStructure service:

	
	var instance = this;

	var defaultLocale = instance.getDefaultLocale();

	var serviceParameterTypes = [
		'long',
		'java.lang.String',
		'java.lang.String',
		'java.util.Map<java.util.Locale, java.lang.String>',
		'java.util.Map<java.util.Locale, java.lang.String>',
		'java.lang.String',
		'com.liferay.portal.service.ServiceContext'
	];

	Liferay.Service.Journal.JournalStructure.updateStructure(
		{
			groupId: groupId,
			structureId: structureId,
			parentStructureId: parentStructureId || '',
			nameMap: '{' + defaultLocale + ':' + name + '}',
			descriptionMap: '{' + defaultLocale + ':' + (description == '' ? null : description ) + '}',
			xsd: xsd,
			serviceContext: A.JSON.stringify(
				{
					scopeGroupId: groupId
				}
					),
			serviceParameterTypes: A.JSON.stringify(serviceParameterTypes)
		},
		function(message) {
			if (Lang.isFunction(callback)) {
				callback(message);
			}
		}
	);

Note, the example above uses JSON to populate the ServiceContext.

On the front-end, you can use Alloy UI and Liferay UI tags in your forms to
extract information and automatically insert the corresponding data into your
request object. As an example, see
`portal-web/docroot/html/portlet/blogs/edit_entry.jsp`. Next, let's take a look
at an example of accessing information from a `ServiceContext`.

### Accessing Service Context data [](id=lp-6-1-dgen08-accessing-service-context-data-0)

This section provides code snippets from
`BlogsEntryLocalServiceImpl.addEntry(..., ServiceContext)` that demonstrates how
to access information from a `ServiceContext` and provides comments on how the
context information is being used.

As previously mentioned, your service will need a scope group ID from your
`ServiceContext`. The same holds true for the blogs entry service because the
scope group ID provides the scope of the blogs entry (the entity being
persisted). In the case of adding a blogs entry, the scope group ID is used in
the following manner:

-	Used as the groupId for the `BlogsEntry` entity
-	Used in generating a unique URL for the blog entry
-	Setting the scope for comments on the blog entry

Here are the corresponding code snippets:

		long groupId = serviceContext.getScopeGroupId();
		...
		entry.setGroupId(groupId);
		...
		entry.setUrlTitle(getUniqueUrlTitle(entryId, groupId, title));
		...

		// Message boards

		if (PropsValues.BLOGS_ENTRY_COMMENTS_ENABLED) {
			mbMessageLocalService.addDiscussionMessage(
				userId, entry.getUserName(), groupId,
				BlogsEntry.class.getName(), entryId,
				WorkflowConstants.ACTION_PUBLISH);
		}

The `ServiceContext` is also used to access the UUID and the time this blog
entry was added.

		entry.setUuid(serviceContext.getUuid());
		...
		entry.setCreateDate(serviceContext.getCreateDate(now));

Can `ServiceContext` be used in setting permissions on resources? You bet! When
adding a blog entry, new permissions can be added or existing permissions can be
applied for the blog entry:

		// Resources

		if (serviceContext.isAddGroupPermissions() ||
			serviceContext.isAddGuestPermissions()) {

			addEntryResources(
				entry, serviceContext.isAddGroupPermissions(),
				serviceContext.isAddGuestPermissions());
		}
		else {
			addEntryResources(
				entry, serviceContext.getGroupPermissions(),
				serviceContext.getGuestPermissions());
		}

Categories, tag names, and the link entry IDs can be applied to the `AssetEntry`
for the blogs entry, as demonstrated:

		// Asset

		updateAsset(
			userId, entry, serviceContext.getAssetCategoryIds(),
			serviceContext.getAssetTagNames(),
			serviceContext.getAssetLinkEntryIds());

The `ServiceContext` also plays a part in starting a workflow instance for the
blogs entry. As you can see, the scope group ID sets the scope for the workflow
to be started for the blog entry.

		// Workflow

		if ((trackbacks != null) && (trackbacks.length > 0)) {
			serviceContext.setAttribute("trackbacks", trackbacks);
		}
		else {
			serviceContext.setAttribute("trackbacks", null);
		}

		WorkflowHandlerRegistryUtil.startWorkflowInstance(
			user.getCompanyId(), groupId, userId, BlogsEntry.class.getName(),
			entry.getEntryId(), entry, serviceContext);

The previous snippet also demonstrates using the `trackbacks` attribute which is
a *standard* attribute for the blogs entry service. But there may be cases where
you need to pass in *custom* attributes to your blogs entry service. To do so,
use Expando attributes to carry these *custom* attributes along in your
`ServiceContext`. Expando attributes are set on the added blogs entry like so:

		entry.setExpandoBridgeAttributes(serviceContext);

As we've demonstrated, the `ServiceContext` can be used to transfer lots of
useful information for your services.

## Using Message Bus [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-using-message-bus-0)

The Message Bus is a service level API used to exchange messages within Liferay.
The Message Bus exchanges only String messages, providing loose coupling between
message producers and consumers. For this reason, you won't have class loading
issues. The Message Bus is located in portal-kernel, in the global class loader,
making it accessible to every deployed webapp. Although, remote messaging is not
supported, messages can be sent across a cluster using ClusterLink classes.

Common uses for Message Bus include:

- Sending search index write events
- Sending subscription emails
- Handling messages at scheduler endpoints
- Running asynchronous processes

You too can leverage Message Bus for sending messages between and within your
plugins.

In this section, you will learn about

-	the Message Bus System
-	Synchronous and Asynchronous messaging
-	Dispatching messages *serially* and *in-parallel* to multiple listeners
-	Java and JSON style message formats

For starters, let's get a handle on the architecture of Liferay's Message Bus
System.

### The Message Bus System [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-the-message-bus-system-0)

The Message Bus system is comprised of the following:

- **Message Bus** - Manages transfer of messages from message *senders* to
message *listeners*

- **Destinations** - Are addresses or endpoints to which *listeners* register to
receive messages

- **Listeners** - Consume messages received at destinations. They receive all
messages sent to their registered destinations.

-	**Senders** - Invoke the Message Bus to send messages to destinations

Your services can *send* messages to one or more destinations. And your services
can *listen* to one or more destinations.

The figure below depicts services sending messages to one or more destinations
and services listening to one or more destinations. An individual service can be
both a message sender and a message listener. In this figure, for example, both
*Plugin 2 - Service 3* and *Plugin 5 - Service 7* send and listen for messages.

![Figure 9.1: Example, Message Bus system](../../images/msg-bus-system.png)

The Message Bus supports synchronous and asynchronous messaging:

- **Synchronous messaging** - After sending a message, the sender blocks waiting
for a response from a recipient

- **Asynchronous messaging** - After sending a message, the sender is free to
continue processing. The sender can be configured to receive a call-back or can
simply "send and forget." We'll cover both synchronous and asynchronous
messaging implementations in this section.

	- **Call-back** - The sender can include a call-back destination key as the
	*response destination* for the message. The recipient (listener) can then
	send a *response* message back to the sender via this *response
	destination*.

	- **"Send-and-Forget"** - The sender includes no call-back information in
	the message sent and simply continues with processing

What's great is your destinations, listeners, and mappings between them are all
configurable via Spring in your plugin's `messaging-spring.xml` file.

**Configuration** of Message Bus is done using the following files:

- `WEB-INF/src/META-INF/messaging-spring.xml` - Specifies your destinations,
listeners, and their mappings to each other

- `WEB-INF/web.xml` - Holds a listing of deployment descriptors for your plugin.
Be sure to add `messaging-spring.xml` to your list of Spring configurations in
this file.

---

 ![note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png)**Note:** Internal file
 `META-INF/messaging-core-spring.xml` of `portal-impl.jar` specifies the default
 Message Bus class, default asynchronous message sender class, and default
 synchronous message sender class for Liferay

---

**Message Types** include using either `Message` or `JSONObject` classes. Within
Liferay core services, we typically serialize and deserialize in JSON. In our
examples, we'll cover using both types of message classes.

So far, we've introduced the Message Bus System including message types,
destinations, senders, listeners, and approaches to sending messages. Next,
we'll show you how easy it is to create your destinations, register listeners,
and send your messages. To help demonstrate, we'll implemenet a business
use-case.

### Example Use-Case - Procurement process [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-example-use-case---procurement-process-0)

For our use-case, we'll consider a fictitious company Jungle Gyms R-Us. They
distribute playground equipment, buying the equipment from manufacturers and
selling the equipment to various retailers. We'll focus on the company's process
for procuring new jungle gym equipment. Let's layout this process now.

Jungle Gyms R-Us (Jungle Gyms) involves the following departments in their
procurement process:

- *Procurement Department* - Scouts out the latest equipment deals of
manufacturers

- *Finance Department* - Determines whether the equipment can be purchased based
on budget

- *Legal Department* - Determines whether the equipment's safety ratings are
acceptable

- *Warehouse Department* - Recieves the equipment, stores it, and prepares it
for shipping

- *Sales Department* - Builds relationships with prospective customers to sell
them products

The departments currently use email to exchange comments about new equipment
purchases. But someone always seems to be left out of "the loop." For example,
Sales will be "gung-ho" about getting their hands on the latest and greatest
spring rider animals from Boingo-Boingo Industries, but they won't consider the
failing safety reviews discovered by the Legal department, because the Legal
department forgot to copy the Sales department in their email to Procurement.
Tempers fly, feelings get hurt, and everybody avoids hanging out in the company
breakroom for the next couple weeks.

Liferay's [Workflow with
Kaleo](http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide/-/ai/workflow-with-kal-4)
would be appropriate for resolving this. But to help demonstrate the components
and capabilities of the Message Bus system we'll resolve the Jungle Gym's
communication woes using Message Bus.

Here are the inter-department message exchanges we'll accomodate:

| Message | &nbsp;Sender | &nbsp;Listener | &nbsp;Response | &nbsp;Response Listeners |
--------- | ------------ | ------------ | ---------------- | -------------- |
  Request permission to proceed with purchase | &nbsp;Procurement | &nbsp;Finance | &nbsp;required | &nbsp;Procurement |
  Request permission to proceed with purchase | &nbsp;Procurement | &nbsp;Legal | &nbsp;required | &nbsp;Procurement |
  Notify and solicit feedback on new purchase | &nbsp;Procurement | &nbsp;Warehouse | &nbsp;optional | &nbsp;Procurement, Sales |
  Notify and solicit feedback on new purchase | &nbsp;Procurement | &nbsp;Sales | &nbsp;optional | &nbsp;Procurement, Warehouse |
  Broadcast equipment news | &nbsp;Procurement | &nbsp;Employees | &nbsp;none | &nbsp;none |
---

Let's implement Procurement's request to Finance first.

### Synchronous messaging [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-synchronous-messaging-0)

In our example, equipment purchases cannot proceed without approval from Finance
and Legal departments. But, since these special offers from the manufacturers
often only last for a couple hours, Procurement makes it their top priority to
get approval as soon as possible. Let's implement their exchange using
*synchronous* messaging.

![Figure 9.2: Synchronous messaging](../../images/msg-bus-sync-msg.png)

The following table, describes how we'll set things up.

| &nbsp;Destination | |           |                 |
  Key | &nbsp;Type | &nbsp;Sender | &nbsp;Receivers |
----- | ---------- | ------------ | --------------- |
  `jungle/finance/purchase` | &nbsp;synchronous | &nbsp;Procurement | &nbsp;Finance |
  `jungle/finance/purchase/response` | &nbsp;synchronous | &nbsp;Finance | &nbsp;Procurement |
  `jungle/legal/purchase` | &nbsp;synchronous | &nbsp;Procurement | &nbsp;Legal |
  `jungle/legal/purchase/response` | &nbsp;synchronous | &nbsp;Legal | &nbsp;Procurement |
---

Notice we've planned for Finance to send its response messages to a destination
on which Procurement will listen. This allows for a full-bodied response message
to be sent back to Procurement in addition to the response object returned from
sending the message.

**Procurement Department *sends* a purchase approval request:**

	Message message = new Message();
	message.put("department", "Procurement");
	message.put("partName", part.getName(Locale.US));

	message.setResponseId("1111");
	message.setResponseDestinationName("jungle/finance/purchase/response");

	try {
		String financeResponse = (String) MessageBusUtil.sendSynchronousMessage(
			"jungle/finance/purchase", message, 10000);

		System.out.println(
			"Procurement received Finance sync response to purchase approval for " +
			part.getName(Locale.US) + ": " + financeResponse);

		message.setResponseId("2222");
		message.setResponseDestinationName("jungle/legal/purchase/response");

		String legalResponse = (String) MessageBusUtil.sendSynchronousMessage(
			"jungle/legal/purchase", message, 10000);

		System.out.println(
			"Procurement received Legal sync response to purchase approval for " +
			part.getName(Locale.US) + ": " + legalResponse);

		if (financeResponse.contains("yes") && legalResponse.contains("yes")) {
			sendPurchaseNotification(part, userId);
		}
	}
	catch (MessageBusException e) {
		e.printStackTrace();
	}

Note, the following about this *sender*:

1.	Creates the message using Liferay's `Message` class
2.	Stuffs the message with key/value pairs
3. Sets a response ID and response destination for listeners to use in replying
back
4. Sends the message to the destination with a timeout value of 10,000
milliseconds
5.	Blocks waiting for the response

**Finance Department *listens* for purchase approval requests and *replies*
back:**

	public class FinanceMessagingImpl implements MessageListener {

		public void receive(Message message) {
			try {
				doReceive(message);
			}
			catch (Exception e) {
				_log.error("Unable to process message " + message, e);
			}
		}

		protected void doReceive(Message message)
			throws Exception {

			String department = (String) message.get("department");
			String partName = (String) message.get("partName");

			System.out.println("Finance received purchase request for " +
				partName + " from " + department);

			Message responseMessage = MessageBusUtil.createResponseMessage(
				message);

			responseMessage.put("department", "Finance");
			responseMessage.put("partName", partName);
			responseMessage.setPayload("yes");

			MessageBusUtil.sendMessage(
				responseMessage.getDestinationName(), responseMessage);
		}

		private static Log _log =
			LogFactoryUtil.getLog(FinanceMessagingImpl.class);
	}

Note the following about this *listener*:

1. Implements the `receive(Message message)` method of the
`com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener` interface
2. Extracts values from the `Message` parameter by *getting* values associated
with known keys
3. Creates a `Message` based on the message received via
`MessageBusUtil.createResponseMessage(message)`. Method
`MessageBusUtil.createResponseMessage(message)` accesses the response
destination name from the `message` variable and sets the destination of the
response message.
4.	Sets the *payload* of the response message
5.	Sends the response `Message` to the response destination.

The listener for the Legal Department could be implemented in a similar manner.
So, we'll account for Legal Department related classes in our configuration.

**Message Bus Configuration for the purchase approval request process:**

In order for the Message Bus to direct messages from destinations to listeners,
we must register the listeners by configuring the appropriate mappings in our
plugin's `WEB-INF/src/META-INF/messaging-spring.xml` file. If you don't already
have this file in your plugin then create it. Here is the configuration:

	<?xml version="1.0"?>

	<beans
		default-destroy-method="destroy"
		default-init-method="afterPropertiesSet"
		xmlns="http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans"
		xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
		xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans/spring-beans-3.0.xsd"
	>

		<!-- Listeners -->

		<bean id="messageListener.finance_listener" class="com.liferay.training.parts.messaging.impl.FinanceMessagingImpl" />
		<bean id="messageListener.legal_listener" class="com.liferay.training.parts.messaging.impl.LegalMessagingImpl" />
		<bean id="messageListener.procurement_listener" class="com.liferay.training.parts.messaging.impl.ProcurementMessagingImpl" />

		<!-- Destinations -->

		<bean id="destination.finance.purchase" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.SynchronousDestination">
			<property name="name" value="jungle/finance/purchase" />
		</bean>

		<bean id="destination.finance.purchase.response" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.SynchronousDestination">
			<property name="name" value="jungle/finance/purchase/response" />
		</bean>

		<bean id="destination.legal.purchase" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.SynchronousDestination">
			<property name="name" value="jungle/legal/purchase" />
		</bean>

		<bean id="destination.legal.purchase.response" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.SynchronousDestination">
			<property name="name" value="jungle/legal/purchase/response" />
		</bean>

		<!-- Configurator -->

		<bean id="messagingConfigurator" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.config.PluginMessagingConfigurator">
			<property name="messageListeners">
				<map key-type="java.lang.String" value-type="java.util.List">
					<entry key="jungle/finance/purchase">
						<list value-type="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener">
							<ref bean="messageListener.finance_listener" />
						</list>
					</entry>
					<entry key="jungle/finance/purchase/response">
						<list value-type="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener">
							<ref bean="messageListener.procurement_listener" />
						</list>
					</entry>
					<entry key="jungle/legal/purchase">
						<list value-type="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener">
							<ref bean="messageListener.legal_listener" />
						</list>
					</entry>
					<entry key="jungle/legal/purchase/response">
						<list value-type="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener">
							<ref bean="messageListener.procurement_listener" />
						</list>
					</entry>
				</map>
			</property>
			<property name="destinations">
				<list>
					<ref bean="destination.finance.purchase"/>
					<ref bean="destination.finance.purchase.response"/>
					<ref bean="destination.legal.purchase"/>
					<ref bean="destination.legal.purchase.response"/>
				</list>
			</property>
		</bean>
	</beans>

The configuration specifies the following:

-	*Listener beans* - Specify classes to handle messages
- *Destination beans* - Specify the class *type* and *key* names of the
destinations
-	*Configurator bean* - Maps listeners to their destinations

Upon Finance sending its purchase approval request message for a new three-story
spiral slide, the console reports Finance receiving the message, Procurement
receiving the *callback* response from Finance, and Procurement receiving the
*synchronous* response returned from sending the message:

	Finance received purchase request for three-story spiral slide from Procurement
	Procurement received Finance callback response to purchase approval for three-
	story spiral slide: yes
	Procurement received Finance sync response to purchase approval for three-story 
	spiral slide: yes
	Legal received purchase request for three-story spiral slide from Procurement
	Procurement received Legal callback response to purchase approval for three-
	story spiral slide: yes
	Procurement received Legal sync response to purchase approval for three-story 
	spiral slide: yes

Whew! Jungle Gym has the cash to purchase this cool new slide and the Legal
Department has no gripes about the slide's safety ratings!!

Next, let's have Procurement notify the Sales and Warehouse departments to
solicit their feedback.

### Asynchronous messaging with callbacks [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-asynchronous-messaging-with-callbacks-0)

As a refresher, asynchronous messaging consists of sending a message and then
continuing on with processing. Importantly, the sender does not block waiting
for an immediate response. This leaves the sender free to continue on with other
things. However, it is often important for the *listener* to have the means to
optionally respond to the sender. This can be done using a call-back.

The call-back model is appropriate for addressing Jungle Gym's needs for
Procurement to notify Sales and Warehouse departments about incoming equipment
while at the same time soliciting their feedback. To assure all three
departments are in "the loop", any responses from Sales and Warehouse
departments will be posted to a shared destination.

The following table, describes how we'll set things up.

| &nbsp;Destination | |            |                 |
  Key | &nbsp;Type | &nbsp;Senders | &nbsp;Receivers |
----- | ---------- | ------------ | --------------- |
  jungle/purchase | &nbsp;async serial | &nbsp;Procurement |  &nbsp;Sales, Warehouse |
  jungle/purchase/response | &nbsp;synchronous | &nbsp;Sales, Warehouse | &nbsp;Procurement |
---

The following image shows asynchronous messaging in which messages are
dispatched *serially*.

![Figure 9.3: Asynchronous messaging with *serial* dispatching](../../images/msg-bus-async-serial-msg.png)

Let's package the message as a `JSONObject` and send it to the destination:

	JSONObject jsonObject = JSONFactoryUtil.createJSONObject();

	jsonObject.put("department", "Procurement");
	jsonObject.put("partName", part.getName(Locale.US));
	jsonObject.put("responseDestinationName", "jungle/purchase/response");

	MessageBusUtil.sendMessage("jungle/purchase", jsonObject.toString());

Then we'll have the Sales and Warehouse departments listen for and handle
messages like this ...

	public void receive(Message message) {

		try {
			doReceive(message);
		}
		catch (Exception e)
		{
			_log.error("Unable to process message " + message, e);
		}
	}

	protected void doReceive(Message message)
		throws Exception {

		String payload = (String)message.getPayload();

		JSONObject jsonObject = JSONFactoryUtil.createJSONObject(payload);

		String department = jsonObject.getString("department");
		String partName = jsonObject.getString("partName");
		String responseDestinationName = jsonObject.getString(
						"responseDestinationName");

		System.out.println("Warehouse received purchase notification for " +
			partName + " from " + department);

		jsonObject = JSONFactoryUtil.createJSONObject();

		jsonObject.put("department", "Warehouse");
		jsonObject.put("partName", partName);
		jsonObject.put("comment", "Ugh! We're running out of space!!");

		MessageBusUtil.sendMessage(
			responseDestinationName, jsonObject.toString());
	}

This *listener* deserializes the `JSONObject` from the message in the following
manner:

1.	Gets the message *payload* and casts it to a `String`
2.	Creates a `JSONObject` from the payload string
3.	Gets values from the `JSONObject` using its *getter* methods

Furthermore, this class demonstrates the Warehouse Department packaging up a
response message and sending it back to the Procurement Department by:

1.	Creating a `JSONObject`
2.	Stuffing it with name/value pairs
3. Sending the response message to the response destination of the original
message

You've just used the `JSONObject` message type and have sent an *asynchronous*
response message using a call-back. It's just that easy!

The Sales department could be implemented the same way. Of course, Sales would
put "Sales" as its department value and would likely have a different comment.

Now, if you recall, we want Procurement, Sales, and the Warehouse departments to
all be in "the loop" concerning their responses to the new playground equipment.
So, let's leverage our destination *keys* and department names in handling these
shared responses.

Here is how the Warehouse may handle messages it receives:

	public void receive(Message message) {

		try {
			if (message.getDestinationName().equals(
					"jungle/purchase"))
			{
				doReceive(message);
			}
			else if (message.getDestinationName().equals(
					"jungle/purchase/response"))
			{
				doReceiveResponse(message);
			}
		}
		catch (Exception e)
		{
			_log.error("Unable to process message " + message, e);
		}
	}

	protected void doReceiveResponse(Message message)
		throws JSONException {

		String payload = (String)message.getPayload();

		JSONObject jsonObject = JSONFactoryUtil.createJSONObject(payload);

		String department = jsonObject.getString("department");

		if (!department.equals("Warehouse")) {
			System.out.println(
				"Warehouse is in the loop on response from " + department);
		}
	}

Note, in `receive(Message)`, we handle the messages differently depending on
their destinations; messages to `jungle/purchase` are handled as Procurement's
purchase notifications, while messages to `jungle/purchase/response` are treated
as departmental responses to Procurement's purchase notifications. Importantly,
the `doReceiveResponse(Message)` method checks that the response is from a
department other than itself.

Here are the configuration elements we added to the `messaging-spring.xml` from
the previous section:

- Listener beans

		<bean id="messageListener.warehouse_listener" class="com.liferay.training.parts.messaging.impl.WarehouseMessagingImpl" />
		<bean id="messageListener.sales_listener" class="com.liferay.training.parts.messaging.impl.SalesMessagingImpl" />

- Destination beans - The purchase notifications will be sent to a *serial*
destination and the responses will be sent to a *synchronous* destination.

		<bean id="destination.purchase" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.SerialDestination">
			<property name="name" value="jungle/purchase" />
		</bean>
	
		<bean id="destination.purchase.response" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.SynchronousDestination">
			<property name="name" value="jungle/purchase/response" />
		</bean>

- Configuration bean listener map entries - Warehouse and Sales are registered
to listen for the notifications from Procurement. All three of these departments
are registered to listen for the inter-departmental responses.

		<entry key="jungle/purchase">
			<list value-type="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener">
				<ref bean="messageListener.warehouse_listener" />
				<ref bean="messageListener.sales_listener" />
			</list>
		</entry>
		<entry key="jungle/purchase/response">
			<list value-type="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener">
				<ref bean="messageListener.procurement_listener" />
				<ref bean="messageListener.warehouse_listener" />
				<ref bean="messageListener.sales_listener" />
			</list>
		</entry>

- Configuration bean destination list references

		<ref bean="destination.purchase"/>
		<ref bean="destination.purchase.response"/>

Lastly, let's remember to send news of these new products to *all* Jungle Gym
employees.

### Asynchronous "Send and Forget" [](id=lp-6-1-dgen09-asynchronous-send-and-forget-0)

In the "send and forget" model of asynchronous messaging, the sender simply
sends out messages and continues processing. We'll apply this behavior to Jungle
Gym's company wide notification of new products.

Since Procurement is not expecting response messages from individual employees,
there is no need for the employee's listener to package up a responses. But, we
do however want everyone to get product news at the *same time*. So, instead of
dispatching news to employees *serially* we'll dispatch *in parallel*.


![Figure 9.4: Asynchronous messaging with *parallel* dispatching](../../images/msg-bus-async-parallel-msg.png)

We'll specify a *parallel* destination type in our `messaging-spring.xml`:

- Destination bean

		<bean id="destination.employee.news" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.ParallelDestination">
				<property name="name" value="jungle/employee/news" />
		</bean>

- Listener bean

		<bean id="messageListener.employee_listener" class="com.liferay.training.parts.messaging.impl.EmployeeMessagingImpl" />
	
- Configuration bean listener map entry

		<entry key="jungle/employee/news">
			<list value-type="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener">
				<ref bean="messageListener.employee_listener" />
			</list>
		</entry>

- Configuration bean destination list reference

		<ref bean="destination.employee.news"/>

Congratulations! You've implemented inter-departmental communications for the
procurement process of Jungle Gyms R-Us. Along the way you've exercised the
following from Message Bus:

-	Sender, listener, and destination components
-	Synchronous and Asynchronous messaging schemes
-	*Serial* and *in-parallel* message dispatching
-	Java and JSON message types

You're really getting the hang of Liferay's APIs. Way to go!

## Conclusion [](id=conclusi-4)

Well, you've covered a lot of ground here in learning how to use the API locally
and remotely, how to enable/disable remote services and access to them, and how
to leverage ServiceContext objects in your use of Liferay services. You've also
rolled up your sleeves in working with Message Bus. Well done! Next, we'll take
a look at some of the powerful frameworks of Liferay Portal, learn how they work
and how you can leverage them.
