
# Creating and Integrating with OpenSocial Gadgets 

OpenSocial is a public specification for creating web applications using
standard technologies like HTML, CSS, and Javascript. It was originally
developed by Google, Myspace and others to standardize common social networking
API's but has evolved into a general platform for building web applications.
Whereas "standard" applications work with data on a per-user basis, "social"
applications share data within well defined networks, facilitating communication
of information between groups of users. OpenSocial applications, called
*gadgets*, are similar to portlets because they can be added to your portal's
pages and used for all kinds of tasks. Gadgets are characterized as being
simple, widely available, and easy to deploy.

In this chapter, we'll cover the following topics:

- OpenSocial gadget basics.
- Using PubSub to allow gadgets to communicate with each other and with
  portlets.
- Liferay's gadget editing environment.

Let's first look at the structure of an OpenSocial gadget and consider the
concepts involved with OpenSocial gadgets.

## OpenSocial gadget basics 

An OpenSocial Gadget is specified in an XML document that has two parts. The
first part of the document specifies *meta-data* declaring gadget dependencies,
defining characteristics about the gadget, and specifying user preferences. The
meta-data can be broken up into *module preferences* and *user preferences*.
The second part of the document contains the gadget *content*, defining the
gadget's user interface and business logic. We'll spend time going over all
these facets of gadget XML.

![Figure 9.1: An OpenSocial gadget's XML consists of elements specifying gadget
preferences, user preferences, and content.](../../images/opensocial-22.png)

Below is an example OpenSocial gadget XML file for a map gadget:

	<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
	<Module>
		<ModulePrefs title="Map of __UP_loc__" height="300" 
			author="Jane Smith" 
			author_email="xxx@google.com" /> 
		<UserPref name="loc" 
			display_name="Location" required="true" /> 
		<Content type="html">
		<![CDATA[ 
			<script src="http://maps.google.com/maps?file=js" type="text/javascript"></script>
			<div id="map" style="width: 100%; height: 100%;"></div>
			<script type="text/javascript">
			var prefs = new gadgets.Prefs();
			var map = new GMap(document.getElementById("map"));
			map.addControl(new GSmallMapControl());
			map.addControl(new GMapTypeControl());
			var geocoder = new GClientGeocoder();
			geocoder.getLatLng(prefs.getString('loc'), showMap)

			function showMap(point) {
				if (point!=null) {
					map.centerAndZoom(point, 6);
				}
			};    
			</script>
		]]> 
		</Content>
	</Module>

For more details on the map gadget, visit Google's [Specifying a
Geographical
Location](https://developers.google.com/gadgets/docs/fundamentals#location)
section.

For the official documentation on Gadget anatomy, see Google's [Anatomy of a
Gadget](https://developers.google.com/gadgets/docs/basic#Anatomy). For
convenience, however, let's consider gadget *meta-data* and *content* here to
highlight their important aspects.

### Gadget meta-data 

Gadget meta-data specifies characteristics of the overall gadget and specifies
controls for the user to customize the gadget. Here is a simple breakdown of
these two types of meta-data:

**Gadget Preferences (required):** Define characteristics of the gadget. They are
specified as attributes of and nested elements in the gadget's `<ModulePrefs/>`
element.

**User Preferences (optional):** Store user configuration values and allow users
to give input to the application. They are specified in `<UserPref/>` elements.

Now, let's dive deeper into gadget preferences.

#### Gadget Preferences (ModulePrefs) 

The gadget preferences (ModulePrefs) define characteristics of your gadget,
including features that it uses, how it authenticates content, how it is
displayed to the user, and how it is displayed in a gadget directory. The
preferences are wrapped in `<ModulePrefs>...</ModulePrefs>` tags.

Within the ModulePrefs, you specify the gadget's dependencies with `<Require/>`
tags and optional features with `<Optional/>` tags. If you specify a feature in
a `<Require/>` tag, the gadget only renders itself if the feature is available.
If you specify a feature in an `<Optional/>` tag, the gadget renders despite
feature availability.

ModulePrefs can also be used to configure important features such as PubSub and
OAuth. The PubSub feature allows for communication between gadgets on the same
page: they can publish and subscribe on message channels. Liferay also enables
gadgets to communicate with portlets using the same mechanism. The OAuth
feature provides secure connections between your portal and third-party sites.
These are just a couple of useful features that can be defined in the
ModulePrefs. You'll learn more about them later in this chapter.

Overall, this `<ModulePrefs>` element allows you to register your gadget on a
gadget directory and establish settings and tools to use in your gadget's
business logic. For complete details on ModulePrefs, see Google's [Moduleprefs
Elements and
Attributes](https://developers.google.com/gadgets/docs/xml_reference#Moduleprefs_Ref)
reference.

Next, let's consider gadget user preferences.

#### User Preferences (UserPrefs) 

When a gadget is configured to fit a specific page, it can really enhance the
user's experience. OpenSocial gadgets are capable of storing user preferences,
allowing gadgets to present information and options tailored for individual
pages. The title *UserPrefs* can also be referred to as application
preferences, since the preferences being changed only apply to the single
gadget and not to each user that uses it. A gadget's user preferences are
specified in `<UserPref>...</UserPref>` tags in the gadget's XML. The owner of
a page can adjust permissions to allow certain users to change the user
preferences. However, every time the UserPrefs are modified, every user that
views the gadget has a modified gadget. As a user enters information and
adjusts controls via a gadget's user interface, those changes are persisted in
the database for that gadget instance. Each time the gadget is reloaded, the
UserPrefs are extracted from the database, fed back to the gadget, and rendered
in the user interface.

Map gadgets, for example, are prime candidates for UserPrefs. When users first
bring up map gadgets, they are typically interested in their current location or
a location of interest--not some random distant land. Therefore, it makes sense
for a map gadget to take the user's location of interest as input. UserPrefs
facilitate taking in this information, storing it, and processing it to present
gadget user interfaces customized to the user. Here is the UserPref for our
current map gadget:
 
		<UserPref name="loc" display_name="Location" required="true" />

Notice the UserPref `loc` of the map gadget. This user preference takes in the
user's location preference, stores it, and displays it on the mapping interface.

Lastly, we'll look at what a user sees in the gadget's user interface when
setting the *Location* user preference. Here is a snapshot of what this window
looks like on Liferay Portal:

![Figure 9.2: Here, the map gadget's user preference is made
available for user input.](../../images/opensocial-21.png)

UserPrefs can be displayed in many different ways and help your gadget become
more adaptable to your users' ever changing expectations. And, there is an
extensive variety of UserPref data types available to properly personalize your
gadgets. For complete details on UserPrefs see Google's [User
preferences](https://developers.google.com/gadgets/docs/xml_reference#Userprefs_Ref)
reference.

### Gadget Content 

Within the `<Content>...</Content>` tags of your gadget, you define your
gadget's user interface and business logic. The content can be implemented in
HTML or linked via a URL. HTML allows you to use JavaScript and gives you
plenty of flexibility. But if you simply want to leverage content found at a
particular URL, use the URL content type.

To help you decide which content type is best for you, see Google's [Choosing a
Content
Type](https://developers.google.com/gadgets/docs/fundamentals#Content_Type)
documentation. But for convenience, let's consider basic aspects of these
content types here.

#### HTML content type 

HTML is the default content type for OpenSocial gadgets. Because HTML is so
flexible and commonly used for gadgets, you may find yourself using it often.

Note that all HTML content must be specified in a `CDATA` section within your
gadget's content. The following simple content example demonstrates proper
`CDATA` specification:

	<Content type="html">
		<![CDATA[ "Your HTML goes here" ]]>
	</Content>

Also, it is forbidden to use `<body>`, `<head>`, or `<html>` tags in your HTML
content, as these tags conflict with the ones automatically generated by the
container for your gadget. 

#### URL content type  

This content type is convenient when you just want to reference content within
an existing URL, and nothing more. When using this content type, specify the URL
as your `href` attribute value. The gadget assumes all programming and user
interface logic resides in your specified URL. Therefore, when using the `url`
content type, you do not need any HTML or JavaScript. Note that the URL content
type has better consistency in the specification than the HTML content type
regarding proxied content.

Here is a sample of what the URL content type looks like for an example gadget:

	<Content type="url" href="http://www/cgi-bin/example/gadgets/mystats.cgi" />

Both HTML and URL content types offer beneficial traits and can be used
effectively. The content type you use for your gadgets depends on your needs and
preferences.

Now that you're fundamentally sound on the gadget basics, let's explore what
gadgets offer you in Liferay Portal.

## Accessing third-party applications from your gadget 

Is there data on sites like Evernote, Facebook, Google, Netflix, Photobucket,
Twitter, or Yahoo you'd like to access in your OpenSocial gadgets? Perhaps you'd
like to provide a gadget for portal users to add movies to their Netflix queue
or for users to display their Photobucket pictures within gadgets in Liferay
Portal. You may be concerned that users would have to share their third-party
application credentials with Liferay portal in order to use the applications.
Good news! *OAuth* technology resolves the issue.

You can think of OAuth as a "handshake mechanism" where, instead of requiring
the exchange of personal information, your site redirects portal users directly
to the service provider (e.g. Netflix, Photobucket, etc). Users approve the
gadget's access to their resources on the external web applications. It's just
that easy!

Read the [Gadget
personalization](http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide/-/ai/opensocial-integration)
section of the *Social Networking* chapter in *Using Liferay Portal 6.1* for
instructions on configuring and using OAuth enabled gadgets. To learn how to
write OAuth enabled gadgets, see Google's [Writing OAuth
Gadgets](https://developers.google.com/gadgets/docs/oauth) reference.

Let's now shift our focus to gadget/portlet communication with PubSub.

## Gadget/Portlet Communication with PubSub 

Have you ever wanted your gadgets to communicate with each other or with
portlets? You can do so with *PubSub*. It is a messaging pattern in which
publishers send messages to topics and subscribers receive the messages on those
topics. Hence, the term PubSub is short for "Publish and Subscribe." PubSub is
implemented in Liferay to facilitate interaction between gadgets and interaction
between gadgets and portlets. PubSub is a diverse messaging system that allows
messages to be sent in the following manner:

- gadget to gadget
- portlet to gadget or vice versa
- portlet to portlet

With the use of PubSub, the worlds of gadgets and portlets blend together,
facilitating their ability to communicate and interact with each other.

Publishers don't send messages to subscribers directly; instead, they publish
messages that are characterized into classes and sent across message channels
(topics). Therefore, the publishers have no knowledge of *whom* they are
sending their messages to; they simply broadcast the messages over a channel.
So you may ask: "How do subscribers receive messages if the messages are not
sent directly to them?" Subscribers express interest by subscribing to certain
channels. Once subscribed, they receive messages sent to those channels. Like
publishers, they have no knowledge of *who* sends the messages, they only know
channels and receive messages coming in on those channels. This process makes
it much easier for multiple gadgets and portlets to communicate with each
other, without specifically stating with whom they are communicating. 

PubSub can be compared to a TV station and your TV. The TV station does not
directly send their material to your TV, but instead broadcasts the material
over a channel. You subscribe to that channel by tuning your TV to that channel
to watch what's on it. This process of broadcasting and tuning into TV programs
is similar to publishing and subscribing to messages sent via PubSub.

PubSub also offers the ability for portlets and gadgets to publish to and
subscribe to multiple channels. Although this may seem like a complex process,
PubSub's use of message channels creates a network for gadgets to communicate
across, and the network is easy to maintain and understand.

Let's try out PubSub for ourselves to explore how PubSub works. In this
fundamental example, we'll import two simple gadgets and send messages from one
to the other. One acts as a publisher and the other as a subscriber. Follow the
steps below:

1.  Navigate to the Control Panel and select *OpenSocial Gadget Publisher* from
    under the *Portal* heading.

2.  Select *Publish Gadget* and, for each gadget, enter the URL and click *Save*. 

    *Sample PubSub Publisher URL*:
    `http://svn.apache.org/repos/asf/shindig/trunk/content/container/sample-pubsub-2-publisher.xml`

    *Sample PubSub Subscriber URL*:
    `http://svn.apache.org/repos/asf/shindig/trunk/content/container/sample-pubsub-2-subscriber.xml`
	
3.  Go back to a page on your site, navigate to *Add* &rarr; *More...*, and add
    your new gadgets to the page

4.  Click *Publish a random number* on the PubSub Publisher gadget.  Notice that
    it publishes a number; but the PubSub Subscriber gadget does not receive the
    number.

    ![Figure 9.3: The subscriber cannot receive any messages from the publisher
    without being subscribed to the channel.](../../images/opensocial-23.png)

5.  Select *Subscribe* on the subscriber gadget.

6.  Click *Publish a random number* again from the publisher gadget. You now see
    the random number received by the subscriber.

    ![Figure 9.4: When the subscriber is subscribed to the publisher's channel,
    the subscriber is able to receive messages.](../../images/opensocial-24.png)

7.  Select *Unsubscribe* on the subscriber gadget.

8.  Click *Publish a random number*.

As you would expect, the subscriber portlet no longer receives the random
number.

This simple example illustrates what PubSub does. It opens up a message channel
through which publishers and subscribers can interact. You probably also
noticed that while publishing and subscribing with your gadgets, there was no
need to refresh the page. This is because the gadgets use *AJAX (Asynchronous
JavaScript and XML)*. This technology refreshes your applications
automatically, allowing PubSub to work efficiently and effectively throughout
your Liferay Portal.

I bet you are wondering how to implement PubSub messaging in your gadgets and
portlets. We'll dive into the code next. In fact, we'll complete exercises
demonstrating gadget to gadget interaction and portlet to gadget interaction.

### Gadget to Gadget 

For gadget to gadget communication, two independent gadgets are placed on a page
and configured with PubSub. These two gadgets are able to communicate with one
another and provide tools that the user could not otherwise produce. We will
complete a simple example for gadget to gadget communication where two gadgets
work together to display an address on Google Maps. The first gadget represents
a publisher that enables the user to input a specific address and publish the
address. The second gadget represents the subscriber who receives the address, 
displays the address, and locates the address on Google Maps. Follow the steps
below:

1.  Publish the *Google Address* and *Google Map* gadgets, as we had done
    previously with other gadgets. The URLs are given below:

    *Google Address URL*:
    `http://opensocialdeju.googlecode.com/svn/GoogleMaps/GoogleMapsPublisher.xml`

    *Google Map URL*:
    `http://opensocialdeju.googlecode.com/svn/GoogleMaps/GoogleMapsViewer.xml`

2.  Add both gadgets to a page.

    ![Figure 9.5: Gadgets are easy to publish and some gadgets, like Google's
    *Address* and *Map* gadgets, are automatically synced to communicate with
    each other.](../../images/opensocial-25.png)

    Note: The address bar is already filled with an address. This default
    address is specified in the *Google Address* gadget's source code. We will
    edit this setting using Liferay's gadget editor later in the chapter.

3.  Input an address into the *Address* bar and then click *Update*. You should
    now be able to see that address location displayed in the *Google Map*
    gadget.

    ![Figure 9.6: After inputting a custom address in the *Google Address*
    gadget, you are able to see its physical location in the *Google Map*
    gadget.](../../images/opensocial-26.png)

Congratulations! Your gadgets are communicating well with each other. This
simple example demonstrates two gadgets communicating with each other using
PubSub. We will now dive into the source code and analyze how this interaction
is accomplished.

First, we'll look at the contents of the *Google Maps* XML file
*GoogleMapsPublisher.xml*:

	<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?> 

	<Module>
		<ModulePrefs title="Google Address">
			<Require feature="pubsub-2">
				<Param name="topics">
					<![CDATA[ 
					<Topic title="Google Maps" name="com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo" publish="true"/>
					]]>
				</Param>
			</Require>
			<Require feature="dynamic-height" />
		</ModulePrefs> 

		<Content type="html">
			<![CDATA[    
			<table>
				<tr>
					<td>Address:</td>
					<td>
						<input type="text" id="address" name="address" size="40" value="1400 Montefino Ave, Diamond Bar, CA 91765">
					</td>
					<td>
						<input type="button" value="Update" onclick="updateLoc()">
					</td>
				</tr>
			</table>

			<script type="text/javascript">
				function updateLoc() {
					var address = _gel("address").value;
					gadgets.Hub.publish("com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo", address);
				}

				gadgets.window.adjustHeight();
			</script>
			]]>
		</Content>
	</Module>

The following excerpt from *Google Maps* XML file enables the gadget to use
PubSub and specifies the channel (topic) to which the gadget publishes:

	<Require feature="pubsub-2">
		<Param name="topics">
			<![CDATA[ 
			<Topic title="Google Maps" name="com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo" publish="true"/>
			]]>
		</Param>
	</Require>

Notice the opening `<Require feature="pubsub-2">`, mandating the `pubsub-2`
feature for the gadget. The `<Param name="topics">` section establishes the
topic `com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo` that the gadget publishes to. Within
the *topics* parameter, you define all the topics your gadget uses for
communication. Furthermore, the `publish="true"` attribute specifies the
gadget's role as a *publisher* to the topic.

In the JavaScript of the gadget's *content*, the gadget publishes to the topic
with the following invocation:

	gadgets.Hub.publish("com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo", address);

When the user clicks the gadget's *Publish* button, the message is sent by the
publishing gadget to the topic named `com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo`. PubSub
broadcasts the message received on that topic to all subscribers, such as your
*Google Address* gadget. Each subscriber receives and processes the message. In
the case of your *Google Maps* gadget, the message, containing an address, is
processed by the gadget to show the address location on its map.

Next, we'll analyze the example's *subscribing* gadget's source code specified
in  *GoogleMapsViewer.xml*:

	<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?> 

	<Module>
		<ModulePrefs title="Google Map">
			<Require feature="pubsub-2">
				<Param name="topics">
					<![CDATA[ 
					<Topic title="Google Maps" name="com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo" subscribe="true"/>
					]]>
				</Param>
			</Require>
			<Require feature="dynamic-height" />
		</ModulePrefs>

		<Content type="html">
			<![CDATA[ 
			<script src="http://maps.google.com/maps?file=api&amp;v=2.x" type="text/javascript"></script>

			<div id="map" style="width:100%;height:100%"></div>

			<script type="text/javascript">
				var geocoder = new GClientGeocoder();

				gadgets.HubSettings.onConnect = function(hub, suc, err) {
					gadgets.Hub.subscribe("com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo", callback);
				}

				function callback(topic, data, subscriberData) {			
					geocoder.getLocations(data, showAddress);
				}

				function showAddress(response) {
					map.clearOverlays();
					place = response.Placemark[0];
					point = newGLatLng(place.Point.coordinates[1],place.Point.coordinates[0]);
					marker = new GMarker(point);
					map.addOverlay(marker);
					marker.openInfoWindowHtml(place.address);
					map.setZoom(12);
					map.panTo(point, 13);
				}

				var map = new GMap2(document.getElementById("map"));

				map.setCenter(new GLatLng(43, -100), 3);

				gadgets.window.adjustHeight();
			</script>
			]]>
		</Content>
	</Module>

The subscriber source code is similar to that of the publisher. It mandates the
`pubsub-2` feature for the gadget and specifies
`com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo` as one of its topics, as you would expect. Of
course, the only difference is the fact that this gadget subscribes to the
topic, hence the attribute setting `subscribe="true"`.

The following JavaScript from the gadget's *content* registers a callback on the
`com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo` topic:

	gadgets.HubSettings.onConnect = function(hub, suc, err) {
            gadgets.Hub.subscribe("com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo", callback);

The `gadgets.HubSettings.onConnect` function is called by the OpenSocial
container once the gadget connects to the PubSub messaging hub. In our example, 
the gadget subscribes to the previously mentioned topic. All subscribers to
this topic receive messages sent to it.

When a message is received, the gadget's `callback()` function is executed. In
this example, the callback method sends the received message (the address sent
by the publisher) and calls `GClientGeocoder.getLocations()` to get the
locations. And finally, the locations are processed and displayed on the map.

In summary, subscriber gadgets need to specify a topic and register a callback
function on that topic to handle the messages they receive.

As you can see, PubSub allows your site to run efficiently and enables otherwise
unconnected gadgets to communicate and flourish within Liferay Portal.

Gadgets are not limited to only communicating with other gadgets. In the next
section, we will demonstrate the capabilities of communication between portlets
and gadgets.

### Communicating Between Portlets and Gadgets 

For this section, we will continue implementing the *Google Map* gadget on your
site. If you have portlet applications that can take advantage of the
functionality your Maps gadgets have to offer, it would certainly be convenient
for a user to allow communications between those gadgets and your portlets.

As a demonstration, we will send messages from a *Directory* portlet to the
*Google Map* gadget. For each user listed in the *Directory* portlet, we will
create a *Show in Google Maps* link that, when selected, displays the location
of the user's address in the *Google Map* gadget.

This portlet is much like Liferay's *Directory* portlet. The first thing we need
to do is edit the portlet's `address.jsp` file to configure a Google Maps link. 

As you know from explanations given earlier, the *Google Map* gadget is
distinguished as a subscriber. Therefore, the *Directory* portlet needs to take
on a publisher role to enable communication. To enable the *Directory* portlet
to publish to the topic on which the *Google Map* gadget is subscribed, we
insert the following JavaScript into the `address.jsp` file:

	<script type="text/javascript">
		function publishAddress(address) {
			Liferay.fire('gadget:com.liferay.opensocial.gmapsdemo', address);
		}
	</script>

This code involves a `publishAddress()` function that's called whenever you
click on the *Show in Google Maps* link. The function invokes the
`Liferay.fire()` function, passing in the name of the channel receiving the
message and the user's address as the message. One thing to note is that when a
portlet sends data to a gadget, there must be a `gadget:` prefix before the
channel declaration. This distinguishes who the messages are intended for when
they are broadcast across a channel. Notice that you don't need to change anything
for your *Google Map* gadget, since it's already subscribed to that channel. You
only needed to define the *Directory* portlet as a publisher to that channel.

---

![Note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png)**Note:** If you would like to broadcast
messages to portlets, follow the same guidelines, but don't use the `gadget:`
prefix in your topic parameter value for the call to the `Liferay.fire()`
function.

---

After editing the JSP, you can add the *Directory* Portlet and *Google Map*
gadget to a Liferay page and test it out. Here is a snapshot of what the
interaction would look like:

![Figure 9.7: Your modified *Directory* portlet sends a user address to the
*Google Map* gadget to display the address location in its
map.](../../images/opensocial-27.png)

Letting your portlets communicate with gadgets enhances your portlet
applications and gives you a plethora of different ways you can enhance your
users' experience. 

We will now switch gears and dive into Liferay's gadget editor!

## Using the gadget editor 

As part of Liferay's OpenSocial integration, the *OpenSocial Gadget Editor* is
included with Liferay Portal. The gadget editor is a complete development
environment for gadgets, providing syntax highlighting, preview functionality,
undo/redo options, and built in tabs for working on multiple gadgets at the same
time. You can also organize and manage gadgets easily using the editor's file
manager. All of this gives you the convenience of creating and improving your
gadgets right from within Liferay Portal.

Within the editor, each gadget's XML file has a wrench icon allowing you to
close, rename, delete, or publish the gadget, or to simply show the gadget's
URL. The *Publish* button directs you to a screen, similar to the *OpenSocial
Gadget Publisher*, allowing you to publish your gadget. Gadgets published
through the editor are stored in the site's Document and Media Library. The
*Show URL* button gives you the URL so that the gadget may be shared with other
sites. These options offer a user-friendly and easy to use testing station for
enhancing the gadgets on your sites.

![Figure 9.8: The wrench icon can be easily found to the right of your XML
file.](../../images/opensocial-39.png)

**Note:** When you publish a new gadget,
remember that your Liferay Portal installation is the new host when specifying
the gadget's URL.

For a brief exercise, we will improve the *Google Address* gadget using the
gadget editor. As we referenced earlier, the *Google Address* gadget
automatically displays the address *1400 Montefino Avenue, Diamond Bar, CA
91765* in its text window. By using the OpenSocial Gadget Editor, you can edit
the XML file and specify a customized address or remove the default address
entirely from the gadget's UI. For our example, we will remove the default
address entirely from our gadget's text window.

1.  Copy the gadget XML contents into the gadget editor. Navigate to *OpenSocial
    Gadget Publisher* from under the *Portal* heading and select the URL for
    *Google Address*.

2.  Copy the XML content onto your clipboard.

3.  Navigate to the *OpenSocial Gadget Editor* from the Control Panel and paste
    your clipboard contents into the gadget editor.

4.  Click the floppy disk button to save your new gadget XML, naming your gadget
    *GoogleMapsPublisher.xml*. Press the green check button to save the file.

    ![Figure 9.9: It is easy to insert gadget content into Liferay's
    *OpenSocial Gadget Editor* and save it as an OpenSocial
    gadget.](../../images/opensocial-31.png)

    **Note:** Liferay will not allow you to publish your new gadget without
    attaching `.xml` to the end of your file name. 

5.  Select the *Preview* tab from the toolbar and a preview of your gadget
    appears.

    ![Figure 9.10: The *Preview* tab displays what your gadget would look like
    if it was added to a Liferay page.](../../images/opensocial-32.png)

6.  Locate the following element in the gadget XML:

        <input type="text" id="address" name="address" size="40" value="1400
        Montefino Avenue, Diamond Bar, CA 91765">

    Then, remove the `value="1400 Montefino Avenue, Diamond Bar, CA 91765"`
    setting and save the file.

7.  Select the editor's *Preview* mode and click the refresh button.

    ![Figure 9.11: The refresh button is easy to find in the upper right corner
    of the editor's *Preview* pane.](../../images/opensocial-34.png)

    As you would expect, the gadget's default address is now blank.

    ![Figure 9.12: Your updated gadget now has a blank text window, thanks to
    the editing you've done in Liferay's gadget
    editor.](../../images/opensocial-33.png)

8.  Publish your gadget for portal-wide use by selecting the wrench icon next to
    the *GoogleMapsPublisher.xml* file and clicking *Publish*.

    ![Figure 9.13: You can publish your OpenSocial gadgets directly from
    Liferay's *OpenSocial Gadget Editor*.](../../images/opensocial-35.png)

    A *Publish Gadget* screen opens up, showing your gadget's URL and categories
    to select for your gadget.

    ![Figure 9.14: A *Publish Gadget* window displays your gadget's URL and a
    host of categories for you to consider for your
    gadget.](../../images/opensocial-36.png)

9.  Choose a category and click *Save*.

Your new gadget is now available for portal-wide use!

The OpenSocial Gadget Editor allows you to create and improve gadgets within
the comfort of your own Liferay Portal instance.

You can facilitate the social interactions on your sites and increase your
portal content's popularity across your social network by leveraging the power
of OpenSocial gadgets.

## Summary 

OpenSocial gadgets offer a plethora of new features to Liferay that present new
opportunities for your portal customization. You've learned the anatomy of a
gadget, how to access third-party applications from a gadget, and gadget
communication with PubSub. Also, you learned that Liferay's gadget editor makes
editing and customizing your gadgets easier than ever. Take a deep breath and
give yourself a pat on the back; you're now a trained gadget guru!

Next, we'll explore the seemingly mysterious world of plugin security management.
