# Liferay Marketplace [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-liferay-marketplace-0)

The **Liferay Marketplace** is an exciting new hub for sharing, browsing and
downloading Liferay-compatible applications. As enterprises look for ways to
build and enhance their existing platforms, developers and software vendors are
searching for new avenues to reach this market. Marketplace leverages the entire
Liferay ecosystem to release and share apps in a user-friendly, one-stop site.

This chapter covers topics related to developing for the Liferay Marketplace,
including:

- Marketplace Basics
- Requirements for Publishing to the Marketplace
- Developing and Testing apps for the Marketplace
- Publishing apps to the Marketplace
- Maintaining and Updating apps
- Tracking app Performance

This chapter focuses on the topics of interest to a Liferay developer. It is
highly recommended that you first read the [Liferay Marketplace](http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide/-/ai/liferay-marketpla-1)
chapter of *Using Liferay Portal*, where you will find detailed information about the
Marketplace from an end user's perspective.
 
## Marketplace basics [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-marketplace-basics-0)

Before diving into the details of developing for the Marketplace, it is
important to have a good grasp of new concepts introduced in the Marketplace.
The following list of questions will help in understanding the concepts that you
will use over and over again as a Marketplace developer.

### What is an app? [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-what-is-an-app-0)

As a Liferay Developer, you will undoubtedly already be familiar with the
concept of plugins (portlets, hooks, themes, etc). If not, review chapter 1 of
this guide. A *Liferay App* (sometimes just called an *app*) is a collection of
one or more of these plugins, packaged together to represent the full
functionality of an application on the Liferay platform. In addition to the
plugins contained within an app, apps have metadata such as names, descriptions,
versions, and other ancillary information used to describe and track the app
throughout its lifecycle.

Much like standard Liferay plugins, Liferay apps are also *hot-deployable*. If
you were to download an app from the Marketplace, you would find that it is a
special file type with a `.lpkg` extension. This file can be dropped into
Liferay's hot-deploy folder like any other plugin, and it is deployed into the
running instance of Liferay Portal.

Developers are not required to create the actual Liferay app files. Instead,
your app's individual plugins (`.war` files) are uploaded as part of the publish
process, along with identifying information (name, description, version, icon,
etc). This is described in detail later on in this chapter.

### What is a version? [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-what-is-a-version-0)

The concept of versioning is well known in software, and it is no different
here. A version of an app represents the functionality of the app at a given
point in time. When an app is first created, it is given an initial version
(often `1.0`). When updates are needed for the app, a new version is created
(e.g. `1.1`), and new files are uploaded representing that version. In some
cases, additional qualifiers can be found in the version specifier, to which
developers often give special meaning. For example, a developer may declare that
the version of their app is always in x.y.z format (where the significance of
each x, y, and z are defined). Liferay itself also does this.

In any case, as developer of your app, you have complete freedom in how you wish
to assign version designators. It is highly recommended that you stick to a well
known and easy to understand format, such as `1.0`, `1.1`, `1.2`, and so on. You
may also include alphabetical characters (e.g `1.0 Beta 2` or `6.3 Patch
123235-01`), but this is not recommended, as it makes it difficult to understand
how versions relate to one another.

Keep in mind that the version of your app is completely up to you to specify,
but the releases of Liferay with which your app works must be specified using
the Liferay versioning scheme. See the *Specify App Packaging Directives*
section below for details on how to specify the releases of Liferay for which
your app is designed.

### What is a package? [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-what-is-a-package-0)

Apps can be written to work across many different versions of Liferay. For
example, suppose you wish to publish version 1.0 of your app, which you're
supporting on Liferay 6.1 and 6.2. It may not be possible to create a single
binary `.war` file that works across both Liferay versions, due to
incompatibilities between these Liferay versions. In this case, you need to
compile your app twice: once against Liferay 6.1 and once against 6.2, producing
2 different *packages* (also called variations) of your version 1.0 app. Each
package has the same functionality, but they're different files, and it is these
packages that you can upload in support of different versions of Liferay, as you
will see in a later section. In this guide, packages are sometimes referred to
as files that make up your app.

### How do apps relate to users and companies? [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-how-do-apps-relate-to-users-and-companies-0)

When publishing an app, it is possible to publish it *on behalf of* yourself (an
individual) or a *company* with which you are associated. The selection you make
determines who has access to the app, once published. To understand the concepts
of a Marketplace user, admin, and company, and the ramifications of choosing one
vs. the other, visit the *Liferay Marketplace* chapter in the User Guide.

### What are the requirements for publishing apps? [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-what-are-the-requirements-for-publishing-apps-0)

Liferay apps are "normal" Liferay plugins with additional information about
them. Therefore, most of the requirements are the same as those that exist for
other Liferay plugins that are detailed in the *Portlet Development* chapter of
this guide. In addition to those, there are some Marketplace-specific
requirements to keep in mind.

- *Target the Java 6 JRE*: Your app's byte code must be compatible with Java 6
  (i.e., Java 1.6). Liferay's Plugins SDK already targets Java 6 via the
  `build.properties` setting `ant.build.javac.target=1.6`; so don't override
  this setting. Your app will be rejected if its byte code is not compatible
  with Java 6. 
- *WAR (`.war`) files*:
    - WARs must contain a `WEB-INF/liferay-plugin-package.properties` file.
    - WARs must not contain any `WEB-INF/liferay-plugin-package.xml` file.
    - WAR file names must not contain any commas.
    - WAR file names must conform to the following naming convention:
    
      *context_name*`-` *plugin_type* `-`A`.`B`.`C`.`D`.war`

      Where:

    - *context_name* - Alpha-numeric (including `-` and `_`) short name of
      your app.  This name is used as the deployment context, and should not
      duplicate any other app's context (you will see a warning if you use a
      context name of any other app on the Marketplace).

    - *plugin_type* - one of the following: `hook`, `layouttpl`,
      `portlet`, `theme`, or `web`.                            

    - `A`.`B`.`C`.`D` - The 4 digit version of your WAR file.  4 digits must
       be used.

      Example: `myapp-portlet-1.0.0.0.war`

- *liferay-plugin-package.properties file*:
    - Property `recommended.deployment.context` must not be set.
    - Setting property `security-manager-enabled` to `true` is mandatory for all
      paid apps on 6.1 CE GA3, 6.1 EE GA3, and later, but is optional for free
      apps. Setting this property to `true` enables Liferay's Plugin Security
      Manager. If you're enabling the security manager, you'll also need to
      define your Portal Access Control List (PACL) in this file. Read 
      Chapter 13 on Plugin Security Management for information on developing
      secure apps. 
- *Deployment contexts*:
    - Liferay reserves the right to deny an application if any of its plugin
      deployment contexts is the same as another plugin in the Marketplace.
    - Liferay reserves the right to replace WAR files of app plugins that have
      the same deployment context as plugins built by Liferay.

---

 ![note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png) **Important:** If you're developing a
 paid app or want your free app to satisfy Liferay's Plugin Security Manager,
 Chapter 13 on Plugin Security Management for details. Give yourself adequate
 time to develop your app's PACL and time to test your app thoroughly with the
 security manager enabled. 

---

Now that you've learned the packaging and deployment requirements for your app,
let's consider the versions of Liferay you're targetting for your app and how to
prepare your app for them. 

### Things you need before you can publish [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-things-you-need-before-you-can-publish-0)

You must first develop your app using your preferred development tool (for
example, using Liferay Developer Studio or the Plugins SDK). Your app will
consist of one or more Liferay plugins. Ensure your app is designed to work with
Liferay 6.1 or later. If you wish to target multiple versions of Liferay (for
example, you may wish to support both 6.1 CE GA3 and 6.1 EE GA3), ensure you
have built binary images of your app for each supported minor family release, if
necessary. If a single set of files will work across all supported Liferay
versions, you do not need to build multiple plugins. Liferay guarantees
compatibility within a given minor release family, so your users can rest
assured that your app will work with the minor release that you specify, along
with all future maintenance releases of that minor release.

Next, think of a good name and description of your app, along with a versioning
scheme you wish to use. Take some screenshots, design an icon, create web sites
for your app (if they do not already exist), and have a support plan in place.

### Image and Naming Requirements [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-image-and-naming-requirements-0)

**Icons** for your app *must be* exactly 90 pixels in both height and width and
must be in PNG, JPG, or GIF format. The image size cannot exceed 512kb. Animated
images are prohibited.
**Screenshots** for your app *must not exceed* 1080 pixels in width x 678 pixels
in height and must be in the JPG format. The file size of each screenshot *must
not exceed* 384KB. Each screenshot should preferably be the same size (each will
be automatically scaled to match the aspect ratio of the above dimensions), and
it is preferable if they are named sequentially, for example
`fluffy-puppies-01.png`, `fluffy-puppies-02.png`, and so on.
**Titles of Apps**: In some views with Marketplace, titles of applications
longer than 18 characters will be shortened with ellipsis. In the Marketplace,
titles *must not be* longer than 50 characters.
**Description, Tags, Websites and Version Numbers**: Descriptions, web sites and
version numbers are to be as reflective to the product as possible. Please do
not use misleading names, information, or icons. A tags suggestion tool has been
provided to aid with tagging your asset. Descriptions should be as concise as
possible. Ensure your icons, images, descriptions, and tags are free of
profanity or other offensive material.

Above and beyond these basics of creating apps in the form of Liferay plugins,
there are additional considerations to take into account when designing and
publishing apps.

### What kind of validations are performed by Liferay? [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-what-kinds-of-validation-are-performed-by-liferay-0)

Liferay will ensure that apps meet a minimum set of requirements, such as:

- Running basic anti-virus checks
- Ensuring titles, descriptions, images, etc. are appropriate
- Basic sanity checking of functionality (e.g. deployment testing, etc)

Liferay does not do source code reviews and will not ask for your source code.
Further, Liferay is not responsible for the behavior (or misbehavior) of apps on
the Marketplace. For details regarding this, consult the *Liferay Marketplace
User Agreement*, *Liferay Marketplace Developer Agreement*, and the individual
*End User License Agreements* associated with each app.
 
### What versions of Liferay should I target? [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-what-versions-of-liferay-should-i-target-0)

Of course, targeting the widest possible range of versions will ensure you a
larger audience. However, there are certain features in specific versions of
Liferay that you may wish to take advantage of. When uploading apps, you can
specify which versions your app is compatible with and you can have multiple
files for your app designed for different versions of the Liferay Platform.

Note that apps on the Liferay Marketplace must be designed for Liferay 6.1 and
later. That's not to say that they will not work with prior versions. However,
only Liferay 6.1 has support for installing Apps directly from the Marketplace
and safeguards against malicious Apps that will be ineffective on earlier
versions of Liferay. If you wish to use an app for an earlier version, consult
the documentation for that app, as it may or may not be supported on earlier
versions of Liferay.

Read the *Specify App Compatibility* section below for details on how to specify
which versions of Liferay your app works with.

---

 ![note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png)**Note:** If you haven't yet done so, be
 sure to read the [Marketplace](http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide/-/ai/liferay-marketpla-1)
 chapter of *Using Liferay Portal*! 

---

Now that we have covered the basics, you're armed with enough knowledge to start
creating apps on the Marketplace, so let's see what that looks like in the next
section.

## Developing and publishing apps [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-developing-and-publishing-apps-0)

Let's jump right in with an example. In this section, we'll walk you through the
creation and publication steps (but we won't actually publish the app on the
Marketplace, since this example app isn't very useful!). After walking through
this, you should understand how Marketplace App development typically occurs.

### Develop a sample app [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-develop-a-sample-app-0)

Before you can publish anything, you first have to create (develop) an app! Apps
are nothing more than collections of individual plugins, so the first step in
development an app for the Marketplace is to develop the functionality in the
form of one or more Liferay plugins. To create a sample app (which will consist
of a single portlet), follow the detailed instructions in the *Portlet
Development* chapter of this guide. After creating and deploying your sample
app, return here to continue.

In the real world, apps usually consist of multiple components (e.g. multiple
`.war` file plugins), are spread across multiple plugin types, and present
non-trivial functionality which in many cases requires some configuration. How
these advanced tasks are dealt with is out of scope for this section, but some
tips and considerations for Marketplace development can be found later in this
chapter.

### Specify App Packaging Directives [](id=lp-6-1-dgen12-specify-app-packaging-directives-0)

When publishing your app, each plugin you upload is packaged into one or more
*packages* for each Liferay release you intend to support. When you upload your
plugins to the Liferay Marketplace, your app is scanned, and the embedded
packaging directives you have specified are extracted and used to create
different downloadable *packages* of your app for different Liferay releases.
You must insert this information into each plugin in your app before you can
publish it to the Marketplace.

The packaging directives are related to the Liferay releases with which your app
is compatible. In order to specify which release of Liferay your app is
compatible with (and therefore which packages should be created for eventual
download on the Marketplace), you first need to understand how Liferay releases
are named and how they relate to the underlying Liferay release version. Details
can be found on the [Versioning Policy
Wiki](http://www.liferay.com/community/wiki/-/wiki/Main/Liferay+Versioning+Policy).
Accordingly, Liferay 6.1 CE GA1 is designated as version `6.1.0`. CE GA2 is then
`6.1.1`, and so on. Liferay 6.1 EE GA1 is designated as `6.1.10`. EE versioning
follows a slightly different policy given then presence of fix packs and service
packs, so 6.1 EE GA3 is `6.1.30`.

For each plugin that makes up your app, packaging directives must be placed in
the `liferay-plugin-package.properties` file (located in the `WEB-INF/`
directory of your plugin's `.war` file). Within this file, you must specify a
comma-separated list of Liferay releases with which your app is compatible, and
for which packages should be generated, using the `liferay-versions` keyword.
Marketplace will create packages that contain your plugins based on these
packaging directives (and will intelligently group them together as each plugin
is uploaded).  You should specify CE versions first, followed by EE versions,
using this form: `liferay-versions=CE,CE,CE+,EE,EE,EE+` (where `CE` and `EE`
are replaced with the corresponding Liferay Releases with which your app is
compatible).

 ![note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png)**Note:** If your app is compatible with
 both CE and EE, you must specify a set of versions for both CE and EE releases.
 If you only specify compatibility with CE, then your app will not be compatible
 with (and will fail to deploy to) any EE release.

For example, to specify that a particular plugin in your app is compatible with
Liferay 6.1 CE GA3 (and later), and 6.1 EE GA3 (and later), add this line to
your `liferay-plugin-packages.properties` file:

    liferay-versions=6.1.2+,6.1.30+

This means that the app works with any 6.1 CE release starting with CE GA3, and
and 6.1 EE release starting with EE GA3. Marketplace will create two packages,
one that is compatible with the 6.1 CE GA3 release and *later*, and another that
is compatible with 6.1 EE GA3 release and *later*.

 ![note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png)**Note:** Any CE or EE versions you
 include in your packaging directives *must* be terminated with a version using
 the `+` symbol.  This ensures that your app will be deployable onto future
 versions of Liferay (but does not guarantee your app will work in future
 versions).  So, `liferay-versions=6.1.1,6.1.2` will not work, but
 `liferay-versions=6.1.1,6.1.2+` will work.  Similarly,
 `liferay-versions=6.1.2+,6.1.30,6.1.31` will not work (as the EE versions are
 not properly terminated), but `liferay=versions=6.1.2+,6.1.30,6.1.31+` will
 work.


Here are some additional examples:

    # works with Liferay 6.1 CE and EE GA3 and later (NOT compatible with 6.1
    # CE or EE GA2).  This is most likely what you want to use.
    liferay-versions=6.1.2+,6.1.30+

    # works with Liferay 6.1 CE GA2, GA3, and GA5 (but not GA4), and EE GA2
    # and later
    liferay-versions=6.1.1,6.1.2,6.1.4+,6.1.20+
    
    # works with Liferay 6.1 EE GA3 and later (NOT compatible with CE)
    liferay-versions=6.1.30+

You may find it advantageous to implement one of your app's plugins in multiple
ways, customizing that plugin for different Liferay releases. We'll illustrate
this with an example. 

#### Example App: Using Different Versions of a Hook [](id=using-different-versions-of-a-hook-liferay-portal-6-1-dev-guide-en)

Suppose your app consists of two plugins: a portlet and a hook. The portlet uses
standard API calls that work on all Liferay 6.1 releases. Your hook, on the
other hand, needs to interact with EE GA3 differently than it does with CE GA3,
because you want the hook to take advantage of an exclusive EE feature. For your
app, how do you provide one version of your hook plugin for EE and another
version of it for CE, while applying your portlet plugin to both EE and CE? 

It's easy. In this case, you'd specify versions
`liferay-versions=6.1.2+,6.1.30+` for your portlet plugin, indicating that it is
compatible with CE GA3 and later, and EE GA3 and later. As for your hook plugin,
you'd create and build *two* versions of it, one version of the hook to use with
Liferay EE and the other version of the hook to use with Liferay CE. You'd
specify `liferay-versions=6.1.30+` for your EE hook and
`liferay-versions=6.1.2+` for your CE hook. The EE hook would work exclusively
with EE GA3 and later, while the CE hook would work exclusively with CE GA3 and
later. You might think that it's difficult to arrange the packaging for an app
that has plugins targeted to different Liferay releases, but it's easy.
Marketplace takes care of it based on the `liferay-versions` values you
specified for each plugin. We'll talk about that next.  

#### Marketplace Packages Your App's Plugins [](id=marketplace-packages-your-app-plugins-liferay-portal-6-1-dev-guide-en)

When you upload your app's plugins, as demonstrated later on in this chapter,
you'll notice that Marketplace groups them into separate packages based on the
respective releases each plugin supports. Marketplace copies a plugin into each
of the release packages corresponding to its list of `liferay-versions` values.
If Marketplace cannot verify the version of Liferay the plugin supports, it
rejects the plugin. For example, if you specify `liferay-versions=1.0.0+` for
your plugin--perhaps because you are confident it can work on any Liferay
release--Marketplace will likely reject it, because it doesn't know of a `1.0`
release of Liferay. So take care in specifying the Liferay version information
for each your app's plugins. 

Now that you've developed your app and specified its packaging directives, it's
time to get it to the Marketplace! 

### Establish a Marketplace Account [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-establish-a-marketplace-account-0)

Before you can publish anything to the Marketplace, you must first have an
account on [liferay.com](http://liferay.com). If you do not have an account,
visit [http://liferay.com](http://liferay.com) and click *Register* in the
upper-right corner of the screen. Once you have registered, you can visit the
Marketplace at [http://liferay.com/marketplace](http://liferay.com/marketplace).
The Marketplace home page is shown below:

![Figure 15.1: The Marketplace home page is where users go to find new and interesting apps. ](../../images/marketplace-homepage.png) 

This is the front page of the Marketplace and is where users go to find new and
interesting apps. You'll visit here often during the course of development, so
it might be a good idea to bookmark it now. To get started, the first thing you
want to do is visit your personal *Home* page. There is a thin strip at the top
of your browser window. This is known as the *Dockbar*. Many links are present
in the drop-down menus of the Dockbar, including a link titled *Go to My Home*.
This is a link to your personal home page. More details about what you can find
on your personal home and profile pages can be found in the Liferay Marketplace
chapter of the *User Guide*. For now, go to your personal home page by clicking
on the *Go to My Home* link.

![Figure 15.2: Use the My Home Page link from anywhere in Liferay to navigate to your personal pages. ](../../images/marketplace-my-homepage-link.png) 

Your home page contains links to often-used functionality of liferay.com,
including app creation and management. There are several links on the left of
your home page, including one titled *App Manager*. This link allows you to
manage the apps that you have either purchased (or have been purchased for use
in companies you are associated with) or apps that you or your company have
developed. You'll use this page heavily, so a bookmark would be useful here.
Click *App Manager* to visit this page.

![Figure 15.3: The App Manager lets you maintain everything about apps you've purchased or published.](../../images/marketplace-my-app-manager.png) 

You'll notice three tabs across the top:

**Purchased**: This shows apps you have personally purchased, and those apps
that have been purchased on behalf of companies you are associated with.

**Apps**: This shows apps you have personally *published*.

**Add an App**: This screen begins the process of publishing a new app.

Since you have not purchased or published any apps, the first two tabs are
likely empty. Let's get publishing!

### Upload (Publish) your app [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-upload-publish-your-app-0)

To begin the process of publishing your app, click *Add an App*. A form appears,
allowing you to fill in your app's details.

#### Initial app details [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-initial-app-details-0)

The first step is to enter the basic details about your app. 

![Figure 15.4: Add all the details about your app, including tags, categories, and links to your site.](../../images/marketplace-add-app-details.png) 

This screen allows you to enter basic details about the app you are publishing.

**Name:** The name of your application. Arguably the most important detail of
your app, the name of your app should be a good title that conveys the function
of the App but is not overly wordy or misleading. Choosing a good name for your
app is key to its success, so choose wisely! See the *Marketplace
Considerations* chapter for more guidance on how to pick good names. Do not
include versions in the title unless it is a vital part of the name, for example
*Angry Birds 2: More Anger*. Each app on the Marketplace must have a unique
name.

**Description:** Like the name says, this is a description of your app. You can
put anything you want here, but a good guideline is no more than 4-5 paragraphs.
This field does not allow any markup tags or other textual adornments--it's just
text.

**Icon:** The icon is a small image representation of the app. See the
*Marketplace Basics* section of this chapter for detailed requirements for
icons.

**Screen Captures:** You can supply multiple screenshots of your app in action.
The screenshots you upload here are displayed when your app is viewed on the
Marketplace, using a carousel of rotating images. See the *Marketplace Basics*
section of this chapter for detailed requirements for screen captures.

**Tags:** A set of descriptive words that categorize your app. These tags are
free-form and can help potential purchasers find your app through keyword
searches, tag clouds, and other search mechanisms. You can click on
*Suggestions* to let Marketplace suggest some tags for you based on the data
you've already entered. Click *Select* to select from existing tags, or you can
manually type in new tags. See the *Marketplace Basics* section of this chapter
for detailed requirements for tags.

**Category:** Choose the Marketplace category that most accurately describes
what your app does. Users looking for specific types of apps will often browse
categories by clicking on a specific category name in the main Marketplace home
page. Having your app listed under the appropriate category will help them find
your app.

**Developer Website:** This is a URL that should reference the web site
associated with the development of the app. For open source apps, this typically
points at the project site where the source is maintained. For others, links to
a home page of information about this app would be appropriate.

**Support Website:** This is a URL that should reference a location where
purchasers or users of the app can get support for the app.

**Demo Website:** What better way to showcase the amazing capabilities of your
app than to have a live, running version of it for potential buyers to see and
use? This field can house a URL pointing to exactly that.

**App Owner:** Choose to whom the app "belongs" once it is uploaded--either
yourself (personal) or a company. If you wish to publish your app on behalf of
your company, but your company does not yet have a Marketplace profile, you can
enter the company name in the **Company Name** field. If you are a
representative of your company, you can register your company by clicking the
*Register My Company* link.

Publishing on behalf of yourself is the default. When you publish on behalf of
yourself, the app appears in your *App Manager* &rarr; *Apps* list, and your
name appears in the Marketplace as the Publisher/Author. You are the only one
who can manage this app (add new releases, new versions, edit details, etc).

Publishing on behalf of a company effectively hands the keys over to the admins
of the company. The app only appears on the company's *App Manager* &rarr;
*Apps* list. In addition to yourself, company admins can manage this app (add
new releases, new versions, edit details, etc). The app appears to be
authored/developed by the company, not you personally. It also appears on the
company's public profile page under its list of apps.

Make up some sample data to use during this example, and enter it into the form.
Once you have entered all your app's details, click *Next* to move on to the
next screen.

![Figure 15.5: Specify the version of your app here, following the guidelines. ](../../images/marketplace-add-app-version-initial.png) 

On this screen, you must specify the version of your app. Review the guidance in
the *What is a version* section in this chapter to choose a good version
specifier and enter it here. For our example, since this is the first version,
enter `1.0`. Click *Next*.

#### Upload files (plugins) for your app [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-upload-files-plugins-for-your-app-0)

This screen allows you to upload different sets of plugin files (variations) to
support different Liferay versions. You must upload at least one plugin file
before advancing beyond this screen. The screen is shown here as it initially
appears:

![Figure 15.6: Specify a set of files for each version of Liferay Portal you wish to support.](../../images/marketplace-add-app-initial-files.png) 

Press the *Browse* button, and select the plugins that make up your app. Each
time you add plugins to the list, they will automatically begin uploading, and
their compatibility information will be scanned (read the *Specify App
Compatibility* section above to understand what compatibility information is
read from your plugins).

For this example, our app consists of a hook and a portlet. The portlet works
across all Liferay releases, but the hook is built separately for CE and EE.
Therefore, we will upload 3 plugins that make up our app. Once the files are
uploaded, a check mark appears next to each plugin, and the plugins are
displayed based on the compatibility information.

![Figure 15.7: Your app has uploaded successfully.](../../images/marketplace-add-app-uploaded-files.png) 

This indicates that the files were successfully uploaded. Notice that the
portlet plugin was automatically copied for use in both the EE and CE
variations, even though you only uploaded the portlet plugin once. Click *Next*
to advance to the final screen.

#### Preview and submit the app [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-preview-and-submit-the-app-0)

Whenever you make a change (app details, adding files, adding new versions), you
always wind up at a *Preview* screen. This allows you to preview your app as it
will appear in the Marketplace, so you can confirm your changes.

![Figure 15.8: Always preview your app before submitting it. You may see changes here that you want to make before you submit it.](../../images/marketplace-add-app-preview-and-submit.png) 

For this example, review the information. Is it as you expect? If not, click
*Edit* to go back and continue making changes until you are satisfied.

Once you are satisfied, click *Submit for Review*. If you're walking through
this example on Liferay's Marketplace, don't do it, since this is only an
example app. The next section describes what happens when you submit apps or app
changes.

### The review process [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-the-review-process-0)

When you submit apps to the Marketplace, they are reviewed by Liferay
Marketplace staff to ensure that your app meets the minimum standards described
in the above *Requirements* section of this chapter.

Each of the following changes require a review by Marketplace staff before the
change is published to the Marketplace:

- Submitting a new app
- Changing details of an app (for example, changing the description or the
  screenshots)
- Adding a new package (set of files) to an existing app, in order to support
  more Liferay releases
- Adding a new version of an existing app

While your submitted change is under review, you can view the status of your
change by visiting *Home* &rarr; *App Manager* &rarr; *Apps*. You can also
cancel your submission by clicking *Cancel Submission* on the *Preview* screen
for each app.

Once your app is approved by Marketplace staff, congratulations! You will
receive an email confirmation and at that moment, your app is in the
Marketplace. The app is also shown on your public Profile page, which lists all
apps that you have personally developed and published.

If your app is rejected, an email will be sent to the email address associated
with the app, along with a note explaining the reasons for rejection.  At that
point, you can make the requested changes, and re-submit the app for approval.

Now that you have successfully published your first app, you'll likely get all
kinds of feedback from users and yourself about what's right and wrong with it.
In the next section, we'll explore how to make changes once you have published
your app.

## Making changes to published apps [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-making-changes-to-published-apps-0)

After your app is published and approved, you will undoubtedly need to make one
or more of these kinds of changes during the life of the app:

- Editing your app details (e.g. description, icon, etc)
- Adding support for a new version of Liferay Portal
- Releasing a new version of your app to fix bugs or offer new functionality
- Disabling your apps

Liferay Marketplace supports all of the above operations as described below.

### Editing your app details [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-editing-your-app-details-0)

App details include the name, description, icon, screenshots, and other
information that you supplied on the first screen during the app creation
process. To make changes to this content for your app, navigate to *Home* &rarr;
*App Manager* &rarr; *Apps*, then click the *Action* button next to the app you
wish to edit, and select *Edit*.

![Figure 15.9: Editing an app is as simple as navigating to it and clicking *Edit*.](../../images/marketplace-edit-app-details.png) 

This screen shows you what the app looks like on the Marketplace. To edit the
detail information, click the *Edit* button at the bottom of the preview. This
allows you to edit details (as well as add new files to your existing version).
Note that the current values as they appear in your app are used to pre-fill the
form. Make any changes as needed on this screen, and click *Next*. If you do not
need to edit any more variations, you can continue clicking *Next* until you
reach the final preview screen. Click *Submit for Review* to submit your detail
changes for review. Once approved, the changes you request appear on the
Marketplace.

### Adding support for new versions of Liferay Portal [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-adding-support-for-new-versions-of-liferay-portal-0)

If you need to add files in support of another Liferay release, the process is
similar. Navigate to *Home* &rarr; *App Manager* &rarr; *Apps*, click on the
*Action* button next to the app for which you wish to add new files, and click
*Edit*. Click *Next* to advance past the details screen (making any changes as
needed), and click *Next* to advance past the version edit screen (you can't
actually edit the version number of an already-approved version, but you can
edit the "What's New" information if needed).

Once you advance past the version edit screen, you'll be at the File Upload
screen. This screen should look familiar--it's the same workflow used when you
initially created your app! The difference is that you can't edit pre-approved
files for specific Liferay releases. You can only add *new* files for a
different Liferay release (if you actually need to update existing files, you
must create a new version of the app--see the later section on adding versions
for details on how to do this).

Upload your new files (ensuring that your new plugins have updated compatibility
information, see the section on *Specify App Compatibility* for details on
versioning), click *Next*, and observe the newly-added files listed at the
bottom of the preview screen. Click *Submit for Review* to submit your requested
change (adding of files). The files will be reviewed by Liferay, and once
approved, the new package is available for download in the Marketplace.

### Releasing a new version of your app [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-releasing-a-new-version-of-your-app-0)

After time passes, you may wish to add new functionality to your app or fix a
batch of bugs. This can be accomplished by releasing a new version of your app.
New versions offer your users new functionality and bugfixes, and users are
generally encouraged to always use the latest version. In addition, when a new
version of your app becomes available, existing users are notified automatically
through Liferay's notification system.

New versions of your apps are created similarly to the way the initial version
was. To add a new version, navigate to *Home* &rarr; *App Manager* &rarr;
*Apps*. Click the *Action* button next to the app for which you wish to add a
new version, and then click *Edit*. You will be taken to the Details screen. At
the bottom of the Details screen, click the *Add New Version* button. This
button begins the process of adding a new version, starting with the App Details
screen. In this case, the screen is pre-filled with data from the current
version of the app, as shown below.

![Figure 15.10: Adding a version is similar to creating a new app, except that the fields are filled in for you.](../../images/marketplace-add-version-details.png) 

You can make any changes to the pre-filled data on this screen. Since this is a
new version of an existing app making major changes (such as completely changing
the name or description) might be unsettling to your existing users. It is
common that you'll want to upload new screenshots and refresh the icon. Note
that you cannot change the app owner (such as moving from a personally-developed
app to a company-developed app).

Clicking *Next* takes you through the same screens you've already seen. On the
*Add App Version* screen, you can specify a new version name for this version of
your app. Also, note that when adding new versions to an existing app, you have
the option to add *What's New* text. This is typically filled in with a list of
changes for this version, such as significant new features or bugfix
information. Clicking *Next* from here allows you to upload the files associated
with the new version of the app. For a new version of the app, you must upload
all files for all supported Liferay versions again, even if they have not
changed since the last version.

### Deactivating your app [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-deactivating-your-app-0)

When the time comes to retire your app, you can *Deactivate* it. Deactivating an
app causes the app to no longer be downloadable from the Marketplace for new
customers and it won't appear in any public Marketplace listings. Existing
customers that have already downloaded your app can continue downloading the
legacy versions of the app they have already acquired, but they can't download
any versions they've not already received. The app remains in your inventory,
with all of its history, in case you need to re-activate or reference it in the
future.

To deactivate your app, navigate to *Home* &rarr; *App Manager* &rarr; *Apps*,
click on the *Actions* button next to the app for which you want deactivate, and
select the *Deactivate* action.

## Tracking app performance [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-tracking-app-performance-0)

One of the main reasons for developing and publishing apps into the Marketplace
is to drive downloads and adoption of your app. The Marketplace enables you, as
the developer of your app, to get detailed reports about the number of views,
downloads, and installations of your app(s). To access these metrics, navigate
to *Home* &rarr; *App Manager* &rarr; *Apps*, click on the *Actions* button next
to the app for which you want metrics, and select the *Metrics* action.

![Figure 15.11: App metrics let you see graphically how many views, downloads, and installations your app has in the Marketplace.](../../images/marketplace-app-metrics-views.png) 

The view shown above is the default metrics view for a single app. Across the
top is a list of data series options (*Views*, *Downloads*, or *Installations*).
Below that, a date range can be chosen. In the middle, a graph is shown for the
data within the date range. Finally, the same data that is graphed is also shown
in tabular format, in case you want to know the exact values making up the
graph. The different types of data available to view are described below.

### Views [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-views-0)

When someone searches or browses the Marketplace, they click on apps to see
detailed views of the apps they're interested in. When this occurs for your app,
a *View* is recorded for the app, and this data is what is shown on the App
Metrics screen when *Views* is selected at the top. *Views* is also the default
view, as shown above. The number of recorded views per day per user is
unlimited.

### Downloads [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-downloads-0)

A download is recorded for your app when someone downloads a specific package of
a specific version of your app. The number of recorded downloads per day per
user is unlimited.

### Installations [](id=lp-6-1-dgen12-installations-0)

The Marketplace does a best effort in recording installations of your app on
Liferay instances. When a Liferay Administrator installs your app via the
Liferay Administration console (Control Panel), an *Install* is recorded for
your app.

## Summary [](id=lp-6-1-dgen10-summary-0)

In this chapter we introduced concepts and instructions for developers to make
their apps available on the Liferay Marketplace. We looked at how to create,
publish, maintain, and track apps. You do this through
[liferay.com](http://liferay.com), using your own personal credentials and its
features for Marketplace. Next, we covered the requirements for publishing apps,
which did not differ significantly from requirements for general Liferay
development. We then showed how you can publish a sample app on the Marketplace
and how you can modify it as the app evolves. Finally, we looked at how to track
the adoption of apps using view, download, and install metrics. We hope this
information helps you understand how to develop apps for Liferay!

Next, we'll take a look at some helpful plugin developer references. So get
ready to bookmark plenty of links!

