# What is Service Builder? [](id=what-is-service-builder)

Liferay Service Builder is a model-driven code generation tool that lets you
define custom object models called entities. Service Builder generates a service
layer through object-relational mapping (ORM) technology that provides a clean
separation between your object model and code for the underlying database. This
frees you to add the necessary business logic for your application. Service
Builder takes an XML file as input and generates the necessary model,
persistence, and service layers for your application. These layers provide a
clean separation of concerns. Service Builder generates most of the common code
needed to implement create, read, update, delete, and find operations on the
database, allowing you to focus on the higher level aspects of service design.
This tutorial explains some of the main benefits of using Service Builder:

- Integration with @product@
- Automatically generated model, persistence, and service layers
- Automatically generated local and remote services
- Automatically generated Hibernate and Spring configurations
- Support for generating finder methods for entities and finder methods that
  account for permissions
- Built-in entity caching support
- Support for custom SQL queries and dynamic queries
- Saved development time

@product@ uses Service Builder to generate all of its internal database
persistence code. In fact, the services, both local and remote, are generated by
Service Builder. Additionally, the service
[modules](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-portal/tree/7.0.x/modules)
are generated by Service Builder. These things demonstrate Service Builder to be
a robust and reliable tool. It is easy to use and can save *lots* of development
time. Although the number of files Service Builder generates can seem
intimidating at first, you only need to work with a few files to customize to
your applications and add business logic.

+$$$

**Note:** You don't have to use Service Builder to develop applications on
@product@. It's entirely possible to develop them by writing custom code for
database persistence using your persistence framework of choice. If you so
choose, you can work directly with JPA or Hibernate.

$$$

One of the main ways Service Builder saves development time is by completely
eliminating the need to write and maintain database access code. To generate a
basic service layer, you only need to create a `service.xml` file and run
Service Builder. This generates a new service `.jar` file for your project. The
generated service `.jar` file includes a model layer, a persistence layer, a
service layer, and related infrastructure. These distinct layers represent a
healthy separation of concerns. The model layer is responsible for defining
objects to represent your project's entities, the persistence layer is
responsible for saving entities to and retrieving entities from the database,
and the service layer is responsible for exposing CRUD and related methods for
your entities as an API. The code Service Builder generates is
database-agnostic, as is @product@ itself.

Each entity Service Builder generates contains a model implementation class.
Each entity also contains a local service implementation class, a remote service
implementation class, or both, depending on how you configure Service Builder in
your `service.xml` file. Customizations and business logic can be implemented in
these three classes; in fact, these are the only classes generated by Service
Builder that are intended to be customized. Ensuring that all customizations
take place in only a few classes makes Service Builder projects easy to
maintain. The local service implementation class is responsible for calling the
persistence layer to retrieve and store data entities. Local services contain
the business logic and access the persistence layer. They can be invoked by
client code running in the same Java Virtual Machine. Remote services usually
have additional code for permission checking and are meant to be accessible from
anywhere over the Internet or your local network. Service Builder automatically
generates code that makes the remote services accessible. The remote services
Service Builder generates include SOAP utilities and can be accessed via SOAP or
JSON.

Another way Service Builder saves development time is by providing Spring and
Hibernate configurations for your project. Service Builder uses Spring
dependency injection to make service implementation classes available at runtime
and uses Spring AOP for database transaction management. Service Builder also
uses the Hibernate persistence framework for object-relational mapping. As a
convenience to you, Service Builder hides the complexities of using these
technologies. You can take advantage of Dependency Injection (DI), Aspect
Oriented Programming (AOP), and Object-Relational Mapping (ORM) in your projects
without having to manually set up a Spring or Hibernate environment or make any
configurations.

Another benefit of using Service Builder is that it generates *finder methods*.
Finder methods retrieve entity objects from the database based on specified
parameters. You just need to specify the kinds of finder methods to be generated
in the `service.xml` configuration file and Service Builder does the rest. The
generated finder methods let you, for example, retrieve a list of all entities
associated with a certain site or a list of all entities associated with a
certain site *and* a certain user. Service Builder not only supports generating
these kinds of simple finder methods but also finder methods that take Liferay's
permissions into account. For example, if you are using Liferay's permissions
system to protect access to your entities, Service Builder can generate a
different kind of finder method that only returns entities that the logged-in
user has permission to view.

Service Builder also provides built-in caching support. Liferay caches objects
at three levels: *entity*, *finder*, and *Hibernate*. By default, Liferay uses
Ehcache as an underlying cache provider for each of these cache levels. However,
this is configurable via portal properties. All you have to do to enable entity
and finder caching for an entity in your project is to set the
`cache-enabled=true` attribute of your entity's `<entity>` element in your
`service.xml` configuration file. Please refer to the
[Liferay Clustering](/discover/deployment/-/knowledge_base/7-1/liferay-clustering#4-enable-cluster-link)
documentation for more details about Liferay caching.

Service Builder is a flexible tool. It automates many of the common tasks
associated with creating database persistence code but it doesn't prevent you
from creating custom SQL queries or custom finder methods. Service Builder lets
you define custom SQL queries in an XML file and implement custom finder methods
to run the queries. This is useful, for example, for retrieving specific pieces
of information from multiple tables via an SQL join. Service Builder also
supports retrieving database information via dynamic query. Liferay's dynamic
query API leverages Hibernate's criteria API.

+$$$

**Note**: Liferay includes a
[Service Builder library](https://repository.liferay.com/nexus/content/repositories/liferay-public-releases/com/liferay/com.liferay.portal.tools.service.builder/)
and build tool-specific plugins such as the
[Gradle Service Builder plugin](/develop/reference/-/knowledge_base/7-1/service-builder-gradle-plugin), 
which includes Liferay's Service Builder library as a dependency. Service
Builder supports Liferay 7's modular application development style of keeping
API and implementation code in separate modules. The 
[Service Builder sample apps](https://dev.liferay.com/develop/reference/-/knowledge_base/7-0/service-builder-samples)
demonstrate this.

$$$

In summary, we encourage you to use Service Builder for application development
because it's a proven solution used throughout @product@ and @product@
applications. It generates distinct model, persistence, and service layers,
local and remote services, Spring and Hibernate configurations, and related
infrastructure without requiring any manual intervention. It also lets you
generate basic SQL queries and finder methods and methods that filter results,
taking Liferay permissions into account. Service Builder also supports entity
and query caching. Each of these features saves lots of development time, both
initial development time and time that would have to be spent maintaining,
extending, or customizing a project. Finally, Service Builder is not a
restrictive tool: it lets you add custom SQL queries and finder methods and it
also supports dynamic query.
