# Service Access Policies [](id=service-access-policies)

*Service access policies* are a new feature in Liferay 7. They are an
additional layer of web service security defining services or service methods
that can be invoked remotely. Many of them can be applied at once to produce a
combined effect. Service access policies apply only to remote services, not to
local services. To help you understand how service access policies fit into the
big picture, here's a summary of Liferay's web service security layers:

**IP permission layer:** The IP address from which a web service invocation
request originates must be white-listed in the Liferay server's portal
properties file. Any attempted web service invocation coming from a
non-whitelisted IP address automatically fails.

**Service access policy layer:** The method corresponding to a web service
invocation request must be whitelisted by each service access policy that's in
effect. Wildcards can be used to reduce the number of service classes and
methods that must be explicitly whitelisted.

**Authentication/verification layer (browser-only):** If a web service invocation
request comes from a browser, the request must include an authentication token.
This authentication token is the value of the `p_auth` URL parameter.  The value
of the authentication token is generated by @product@ and is associated with your
browser session. The `p_auth` parameter is automatically supplied when you
invoke a Liferay web service via the JSON web services API page or via
JavaScript using `Liferay.Service(...)`. If Liferay cannot associate the
caller's authentication token with a portal user, the web service invocation
request fails.

**User permission layer:** Properly implemented web services have permission
checks. The user invoking a web service must have the appropriate Liferay
permissions to invoke the service.

Note that service access policies respect @product@'s permissions system. Even if
a service access policy grants a user access to a remote service, the user must
still have the appropriate permissions to invoke that service.

Service access policies are especially useful when remote applications such as
mobile devices or Liferay Sync instances need to access Liferay's web services.
Your portal administrators can use service access policies to ensure that these
devices can only invoke remote services from approved lists that can be modified
at runtime.

## Managing Service Access Policies [](id=managing-service-access-policies)

To manage service access policies, navigate to Liferay's Control Panel and click
on *Service Access Policy* under the Configuration heading. Here, you can see
the default service access policies and you can add new ones. When creating or
editing service access policies, keep these points in mind:

- Service access policy names must be unique per portal instance.
- Service access policy names can include only these allowed characters:

        0123456789ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz#:@-./_

- Service access policy titles can be localized; service access policy names
  cannot be localized.
- Allowed service signatures must be entered one per line. Wildcards (`*`) are
  allowed for both class names and method names. The `#` symbol must be used to
  separate a class name from a method name. For example,

        com.liferay.portal.service.UserService

    allows any method from the `UserService` class to be invoked.

        com.liferay.portlet.documentlibrary.DLAppService#get*

    allows any method from the `DLAppService` that starts with `get` to be
    invoked. Thus,

        com.liferay.portal.service.UserService
        com.liferay.portlet.documentlibrary.DLAppService#get*

    allows any method from the `UserService` class to be invoked and any method
    from the `DLAppService` whose name starts with `get` to be invoked.

@product@ contains four service access policies that are enabled by default:

- SYNC_DEFAULT
- SYNC_TOKEN
- SYSTEM_DEFAULT
- SYSTEM_USER_PASSWORD

The `SYSTEM_DEFAULT` policy applies to every request, including unauthenticated
requests. Thus, its list of allowed method signatures is empty, meaning that no
Liferay API can be invoked. The `SYSTEM_USER_PASSWORD` policy applies to
requests for which `AuthVerifierResult.isPasswordBasedAuthentication` is
`true`: i.e., whenever user authentication took place using a password. Its
list of allowed method signatures is `*`, meaning that any Liferay API can be
invoked. Of course, since Liferay API functions include permission checks, the
success of an invocation depends on whether the user has the required
permission. If you want to completely disallow certain Liferay API functions
from being invoked, you can change the `SYSTEM_USER_PASSWORD` policy to
something more restrictive than `*`.

The `SYNC_DEFAULT` policy applies to every Liferay Sync request, including
unauthenticated Sync requests. Its list of allowed method signatures includes
only the `com.liferay.sync.service.SyncDLObjectService.getSyncContext` method.
The `SYNC_TOKEN` policy applies to Sync requests which are accompanied by an
authentication token. Its list of allowed signatures includes
`com.liferay.sync.service.*`, meaning that any Liferay API function that's a
method of a class in this package can be invoked.

`SYNC_DEFAULT` and `SYSTEM_DEFAULT`, as their names suggest, are default
service access policies. Default service access policies are applied to all
incoming requests, including unauthenticated requests. Administrators can
create new default service access policies. To add, edit, or delete a service
access policy, navigate to the *Configuration* &rarr; *Service Access Policy*
section of the Control Panel. Each Liferay plugin can declare own default
policy. (The `SYNC_DEFAULT` policy is a good example.) This policy can then be
changed or disabled by portal administrator. In this case, the plugin can still
verify that the policy exists so there is no need to redefine or update it.

By default, Liferay's tunneling servlet uses the `SYSTEM_USER_PASSWORD` service
access policy. You can, however, create your own policy for the tunneling
servlet and use the property `service.access.policy.name` for the
`TunnelingServletAuthVerifier` to specify that your policy should be used
instead.

## Service Access Policy Module [](id=service-access-policy-module)

Liferay's service access policy functionality is provided by the Service Access
Policy module. This module includes the following important classes:

- `com.liferay.portal.kernel.security.service.access.policy.ServiceAccessPolicy`:
  defines the public interface for `ServiceAccessPolicy`.
- `com.liferay.portal.kernel.security.service.access.policy.ServiceAccessPolicyManager`: defines the public interface for retrieving instances of `ServiceAccessPolicy`.
- `com.liferay.portal.kernel.security.service.access.policy.ServiceAccessPolicyManagerUtil`: bridges service access policy functionality to the parts of Liferay's core that have not yet been modularized.
- `com.liferay.portal.kernel.security.service.access.policy.ServiceAccessPolicyThreadLocal`: makes `ServiceAccessPolicy` instances active.

Liferay's Service Access Policy module resides in the
`modules/apps/service-access-policy` directory in Liferay's source code. In a
running Liferay instance, the service access policy functionality is provided by
these three bundles which you can find in the `[Liferay Home]/osgi/modules`
directory:

- `com.liferay.service.access.policy.api.jar`
- `com.liferay.service.access.policy.service.jar`
- `com.liferay.service.access.policy.web.jar`

These modules provide the service access policy management UI that's accessible
from the Control Panel. They also provide the interface and default
implementation for `ServiceAccessPolicy`.

To configure the Service Access Policy module, navigate to Liferay's Control
Panel, click on *System Settings*, and find the *Service Access Policies*
module in the Platform section. Click on its name to edit it. Here, you can
edit the default service access policy configuration. You can also force a
default policy to be applied even when no policies are applied by the
`AuthVerifier`.

Liferay also contains an `AuthenticatedAccessControlPolicy`. This policy doesn't
do anything if a `ServiceAccessPolicyManager` implementation is present.
If the service access policy module is disabled, however, the
`AuthenticatedAccessControlPolicy` provides a fallback that still requires
authenticated access for web services.

## Summary [](id=summary)

Great! Now you know service access policies can restrict access to Liferay's web
services. Custom service access policies can be created by portal
administrators. They are applied by the portal's token authenticator, e.g., by
OAuth. The service access policies attached to an application define the
services that can be invoked by the application. For example, a Sync service
access policy could be created that defines all of the services that the Sync
application needs to invoke. Then this service access policy could be attached
to the Sync application on OAuth.

## Related Topics [](id=related-topics)

(Coming Soon)
