# Creating Local Services [](id=creating-local-services)

The heart of your service is its `*LocalServiceImpl` class. This class is your
entity's local service extension point. Local services are invoked from your
application or by other applications running on the same instance as your
application. Remote services can be invoked over the Internet if you've made
those services accessible. 

As a best practice, implement your application's core business logic in your
`*LocalServiceImpl` class, and add security checks in your remote class. Before
adding any custom service methods, however, you should review the
[initial service classes](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/running-service-builder-and-understanding-the-generated-code#understanding-the-code-generated-by-service-builder)
that Service Builder generated during its initial run. 

**Best Practice:** If your application needs both local and remote services,
follow these steps:

1.  Implement your business logic in `*LocalServiceImpl`. 

2.  Create corresponding remote services methods in your `*ServiceImpl`.

3.  Use the remote service methods to call the local service, wrapping the calls
    in permission checks. 

4.  In your application, call only the remote services. This ensures that
    your service methods are secured and that you don't have to duplicate
    permissions code.

Note that Service Builder creates a `*LocalService` class which is the
interface for the local service. It contains the signatures of every method in
`*LocalServiceBaseImpl` and `*LocalServiceImpl`. `*LocalServiceBaseImpl`
contains some automatically generated methods that provide functionality common
to all local services. Since the `*LocalService` class is generated, never
modify it. If you do, your changes are overwritten the next time you run
Service Builder. Place your code in your `*LocalServiceImpl`, where it
will not be overwritten.

For example, the Bookmarks application's
[`BookmarksEntryLocalServiceImpl`](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-portal/blob/master/modules/apps/collaboration/bookmarks/bookmarks-service/src/main/java/com/liferay/bookmarks/service/impl/BookmarksEntryLocalServiceImpl.java)
class demonstrates the kinds of service methods that applications commonly need
for working with an entity model. 

Adding an entity to the database requires an ID (primary key), which in
Service Builder applications is generated by the 
[Counter service](@platform-ref@/7.1-latest/javadocs/portal-kernel/com/liferay/counter/kernel/service/CounterLocalService.html). 
Use the `increment` method of this service to generate the key. The
`CounterLocalService` instance is injected into a module as an OSGi service:

    @ServiceReference(type=com.liferay.counter.kernel.service.CounterLocalService.class)
    protected com.liferay.counter.kernel.service.CounterLocalService counterLocalService;

If you're creating local services in Liferay's core, the `CounterLocalService`
instance is injected as a Spring bean:

    @BeanReference(type=com.liferay.counter.kernel.service.CounterLocalService.class)
    protected com.liferay.counter.kernel.service.CounterLocalService counterLocalService;

Since your `*LocalServiceImpl` class extends `*LocalServiceBaseImpl`, you can
access this `CounterLocalService` instance. See your app's
`*LocalServiceBaseImpl` for a list of all the Spring beans/OSGi services you
have available for use.

You can use either the injected class's `increment` method or you can call
Liferay's `CounterLocalService`'s `increment` method directly. For example, a
bookmarks entry is assigned a unique ID like this:

    long entryId = counterLocalService.increment();

The Bookmarks application uses the generated ID as the ID for the new
`BookmarksEntry`:

    BookmarksEntry entry = bookmarksEntryPersistence.create(entryId);

`bookmarksEntryPersistence` is one of the OSGi services Service Builder injects 
into `EventLocalServiceBaseImpl`. 

Next, the Bookmarks application sets the attribute fields that were specified
for the `BookmarksEntry` entity in the `service.xml`. These attributes include the
`groupId`, `userId`, `name`, `url`, `serviceContext`, etc. Lastly, a Bookmarks
folder ID must be associated to the entry.

It's also important to assign values to the audit fields. In the Bookmarks
application, the group of the entity is set first. An entity's group determines
its scope. In this example, the group is the site. The company and user are
specified after the group is set. The company represents the portal instance and
the user is the user who created the bookmark. The Bookmarks application sets
the `createDate` and `modifiedDate` of the Event to the current time. After
that, the generated `addEntry` method of `BookmarksEntryLocalServiceBaseImpl` is
called to add the bookmark to the database. Lastly, the bookmark is added as a
resource so that permissions can be applied to it later. To view the `addEntry`
method in its entirety, see the
[`BookmarksEntryLocalServiceImpl`](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-portal/blob/master/modules/apps/collaboration/bookmarks/bookmarks-service/src/main/java/com/liferay/bookmarks/service/impl/BookmarksEntryLocalServiceImpl.java)
class. For more information about adding resources, please see the
[Assets: Integrating with Liferay's Framework](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/assets-integrating-with-liferays-framework)
learning path. 

The Bookmarks application creates local services for `BookmarksFolder` entities
and `BookmarksEntry` entities. Look at the custom service methods available in
the
[BookmarksFolderLocalServiceImpl](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-portal/blob/master/modules/apps/collaboration/bookmarks/bookmarks-service/src/main/java/com/liferay/bookmarks/service/impl/BookmarksFolderLocalServiceImpl.java)
class for a better understanding of services available for bookmark folders.

Before you can use any custom methods that you added to your `*LocalServiceImpl`
class, you must
[run Service Builder](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/running-service-builder-and-understanding-the-generated-code)
again. Running Service Builder again adds the method signatures of your custom
service methods to your `*LocalService` interface. 

Service Builder looks through your `*LocalServiceImpl` class and automatically
copies the signatures of each method into the corresponding `*LocalService`
interface. After running Service Builder, you can test that your services are
working as intended by
[invoking one of the methods](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/invoking-local-services)
that Service Builder added to your `*LocalService` class. For example, if you
were developing the Bookmarks application, you could make the following service
invocation to make sure that your service works as intended:

    BookmarksEntryLocalService.addBookmarksEntry(bookmarksEntry);

In addition to all of the Java classes and interfaces, Service Builder also
generates a
[`service.properties` file](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/configuring-service-properties) 
to track the service builds.
[Invoking local services](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/invoking-local-services)
is up next. 

## Related Topics [](id=related-topics)

[Running Service Builder and Understanding the Generated Code](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/running-service-builder-and-understanding-the-generated-code)

[Invoking Local Services](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/invoking-local-services)

[Creating Remote Services](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/creating-remote-services)
