# Development Lifecycle for a Liferay Workspace [](id=development-lifecycle-for-a-liferay-workspace)

Liferay Workspaces provide an environment that supports all phases of a Liferay
module's development lifecycle:

- [Creating modules](#creating-modules)
- [Building modules](#building-modules)
- [Deploying modules](#deploying-modules)
- [Testing modules](#testing-modules)
- [Releasing modules](#releasing-modules)

In this tutorial, you'll explore the development lifecycle phases Liferay
Workspace provides for you. Then you'll be directed to other tutorials that go
into further detail for leveraging the workspace's particular lifecycle phase
for a specific tool (e.g., Blade CLI or Liferay @ide@). Let's get started!

## Creating Modules [](id=creating-modules)

The first step of Liferay Workspace's development phase is the module creation
process. Workspace provides a slew of templates that you can use to create many
different types of Liferay modules.

You can configure where your workspace creates modules by editing the
`liferay.workspace.modules.dir` property in the workspace's `gradle.properties`
file. By default, modules are created in the `[ROOT]/modules` folder.

You can also control where themes are generated by specifying the
`liferay.workspace.themes.dir` property in the `gradle.properties` file. Themes
are typically migrated to the `themes` folder after being created using the
[Liferay Theme Generator](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/themes-generator).

To learn more about creating modules in a workspace using Blade CLI or Liferay
@ide@, visit the
[Creating Modules with Blade CLI](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/creating-modules-with-blade-cli)
and
[Creating Modules with Liferay @ide@](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/creating-modules-with-liferay-ide)
tutorials, respectively.

## Building Modules [](id=building-modules)

Liferay Workspace abstracts many build requirements away so you can focus on
developing modules instead of worrying about how to build them. Liferay
Workspace is built using Gradle, so your modules leverage the Gradle build
lifecycle.

Workspace includes a Gradle wrapper in its ROOT folder (e.g., `gradlew`), which
you can leverage to execute Gradle commands. This means that you can run
familiar Gradle build commands (e.g., `build`, `clean`, `compile`, etc.) from a
Liferay Workspace without having Gradle installed on your machine.

+$$$

**Note:** You can also use the workspace's Gradle wrapper by executing `blade
gw` followed by the Gradle command. This is an easier way to run the workspace's
Gradle wrapper without specifying its path. Since the workspace's Gradle wrapper
resides in its root folder, it can sometimes be a hassle running it for a deeply
nested module (e.g., `../../../../gradlew compileJava`). Running the Gradle
wrapper from Blade CLI automatically detects the Gradle wrapper and can run it
anywhere.

$$$

When using Liferay Workspace, the workspace plugin is automatically applied
which adds a multitude of subprojects for you, hiding some complexities of
Gradle. For example, a typical project's `settings.gradle` file could contain
many included subprojects like this:

    ...
    include images:base:oracle-jdk:oracle-jdk-6
    include images:base:oracle-jdk:oracle-jdk-7
    include images:base:oracle-jdk:oracle-jdk-8
    include images:base:liferay-portal:liferay-portal-ce-tomcat-7.0-ga1
    include images:source-bundles:glassfish
    include images:source-bundles:jboss-eap
    include images:source-bundles:tomcat
    include images:source-bundles:websphere
    include images:source-bundles:wildfly
    include compose:jboss-eap-mysql
    include compose:tomcat-mariadb
    include compose:tomcat-mysql
    include compose:tomcat-mysql-elastic
    include compose:tomcat-postgres
    include file-server
    ...

You don't have to worry about applying these subprojects because the workspace
plugin does it for you. Likewise, if a folder in the `/themes` folder includes a
`liferay-theme.json` file, the `gulp` plugin is applied to it; if a folder in
the `/modules` folder includes a `bnd.bnd` file, the
[liferay-gradle](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/liferay-sample-modules)
plugin is applied to it. See the
[Gradle](/develop/reference/-/knowledge_base/7-0/gradle) reference article for a
list of Liferay Gradle plugins automatically provided for all Workspace
apps. As you can see, Liferay Workspace provides many plugins and build
configurations behind the scenes to make your development process convenient.

A good example of the Gradle build lifecycle abstraction is the module
deployment process in a workspace. You can build/deploy your modules from
workspace without ever running a Gradle command. You'll learn how to do this
next.

## Deploying Modules [](id=deploying-modules)

Liferay Workspace provides easy-to-use deployment mechanisms that let you deploy
your module to a Liferay server without any custom configuration. To learn more
about deploying modules from a workspace using Blade CLI or Liferay @ide@, visit
the
[Deploying Modules with Blade CLI](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/deploying-modules-with-blade-cli)
and
[Deploying Modules with Liferay @ide@](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/deploying-modules-with-liferay-ide)
tutorials, respectively.

## Testing Modules [](id=testing-modules)

Liferay provides many configuration settings for @product-ver@. Configuring
several different @product@ installations to simulate/test certain behaviors can
become cumbersome and time consuming. With Liferay Workspace, you can easily
organize environment settings and generate an environment installation with
those settings.

Liferay Workspace provides the `configs` folder, which lets you configure
different environments in the same workspace. For example, you could configure
separate @product@ environment settings for development, testing, and production
in a single Liferay Workspace. So how does it work?

The `configs` folder offers five subfolders:

- `common`: holds a common configuration that you want applied to all
  environments.
- `dev`: holds the development configuration.
- `local`: holds the configuration intended for testing locally.
- `prod`: holds the configuration for a production site.
- `uat`: holds the configuration for a UAT site.

You're not limited to just these environments. You can create any subfolder in
the `configs` folder (e.g., `aws`, `docker`, etc.) to simulate any environment.
Each environment folder can supply its own database, `portal-ext.properties`,
Elasticsearch, etc. The files in each folder overlay your @product@
installation, which you generate from within workspace.

![Figure 1: The `configs/common` and `configs/[environment]` overlay you @product@ bundle when it's generated.](../../../images/workspace-configs.png)

When workspace generates a @product@ bundle, these things happen:

1.  Configuration files found in the `configs/common` folder are applied to the
    @product@ bundle.

2.  The configured workspace environment (`dev`, `local`, `prod`, `uat`, etc.)
    is applied on top of any existing configurations from the `common` folder.

To generate a @product@ bundle with a specific environment configuration to the
workspace's `/bundles` folder, run

    ./gradlew initBundle -Pliferay.workspace.environment=[ENVIRONMENT]

To generate a distributable @product@ installation to the workspace's `/build`
folder, run

    ./gradlew distBundle[Zip|Tar] -Pliferay.workspace.environment=[ENVIRONMENT]

The `ENVIRONMENT` variable should match the configuration folder (`dev`,
`local`, `prod`, `uat`, etc.) you intend to apply.

+$$$

**Note:** You may prefer to set your workspace environment in the
`gradle.properties` file instead of passing it via Gradle command. If so, it's
recommended to set the workspace envrionment variable inside the
`[USER_HOME]/.gradle/gradle.properties` file.

    liferay.workspace.environment=local

The variable is set to `local` by default.

$$$

To simulate using the `configs` folder, let's explore a typical scenario.
Suppose you want a local @product@ installation for testing and a UAT
installation for simulating a production site. Assume you want the following
configuration for the two environments:

**Local Environment**

- Use MySQL database pointing to localhost
- Skip setup wizard

**UAT Environment**

- Use MySQL database pointing to a live server
- Skip setup wizard

To configure these two environments in your workspace, follow the steps below:

1.  Open the `configs/common` folder and add the
    `portal-setup-wizard.properties` file with the `setup.wizard.enabled=false`
    property.
2.  Open the `configs/local` folder and configure the MySQL database settings
    for localhost in a `portal-ext.properties` file.
3.  Open the `configs/uat` folder and configure the MySQL database settings for
    the live server in a `portal-ext.properties` file.

4.  Now that your two environments are configured, generate one of them:

        ./gradlew distBundle[Zip|Tar] -Pliferay.workspace.environment=uat

    You've successfully configured two environments and generated one of them.

Awesome! You can now test various @product@ bundle environments using Liferay
Workspace.

## Releasing Modules [](id=releasing-modules)

Liferay Workspace does not provide a built-in release mechanism, but there are
easy ways to use external release tools with workspace. The most popular choice
is uploading your modules to a Maven Nexus repository. You could also use other
release tools like [Artifactory](https://www.jfrog.com/artifactory/).

Uploading modules to a remote repository is useful if you need to share them
with other non-workspace projects. Also, if you're ready for your modules to be
in the spotlight, uploading them to a public remote repository gives other
developers the chance to use them.

For more instructions on how to set up a Maven Nexus repository for your
workspace's modules, see the
[Creating a Maven Repository](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/creating-a-maven-repository)
and
[Deploying Liferay Maven Artifacts to a Repository](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/deploying-liferay-maven-artifacts-to-a-repository)
tutorials.
