# Implementing Permission Checks [](id=implementing-permission-checks)

Now that your guestbook and guestbook entry web services are up and running,
it's time to implement permission checks for them. Implementing permission
checks for a web service ensures that only users with the correct permissions
can invoke the web service. To implement permission checks in your remote
services, you'll use the `GuestbookModelPermission`, `GuestbookPermission`, and
`EntryPermission` helper classes that you created in an earlier Learning Path.
These classes provide helper methods for checking permissions. The helper
methods in `GuestbookModelPermission` are for checking top level model
permissions. For example, if you need to check whether a user has permission to
add a new guestbook or guestbook entry, you can use `GuestbookModelPermission`s
helper methods. If, on the other hand, you need to check whether a user has
permission to update or delete an existing guestbook or guestbook entry, you can
use `GuestbookPermission` or `EntryPermission`. 

Once you've secured your remote services with permission checks, you'll want to
update your portlet classes so that they call the remote services instead of the
local services. This is to prevent attackers from trying to bypass the UI of
your app by playing with URL parameters to access sensitive portions of your
application. 

## Implementing Permission Checks at the Service Layer [](id=implementing-permission-checks-at-the-service-layer)

To implement permission checks for the guestbook-portlet project's remote
services, use the following steps:

1. Open `GuestbookServiceImpl` and replace the `addGuestbook`,
   `deleteGuestbook`, and `updateGuestbook` methods with the following ones:

        public Guestbook addGuestbook(long userId, String name,
                        ServiceContext serviceContext) throws SystemException,
                        PortalException {

                GuestbookModelPermission.check(getPermissionChecker(),
                                serviceContext.getScopeGroupId(), ActionKeys.ADD_GUESTBOOK);

                return GuestbookLocalServiceUtil.addGuestbook(userId, name,
                                serviceContext);
        }

        public Guestbook deleteGuestbook(long guestbookId,
                        ServiceContext serviceContext) throws PortalException,
                        SystemException {
                
                GuestbookPermission.check(getPermissionChecker(), guestbookId,
                                ActionKeys.DELETE);

                return GuestbookLocalServiceUtil.deleteGuestbook(guestbookId,
                                serviceContext);
        }

        public Guestbook updateGuestbook(long userId, long guestbookId,
                        String name, ServiceContext serviceContext) throws PortalException,
                        SystemException {
                
                GuestbookPermission.check(getPermissionChecker(), guestbookId,
                                ActionKeys.UPDATE);

                return GuestbookLocalServiceUtil.updateGuestbook(userId, guestbookId,
                                name, serviceContext);
        }

    Here, you've added permission checks to the remote service methods by
    calling the `check` helper methods of `GuestbookModelPermission` and
    `GuestbookPermission`. Remember that these methods throw exceptions, so if
    the user doesn't have permission, processing stops at the permission check.
    The `GuestbookModelPermission.check` method takes the following three
    parameters:

    - a `PermissionChecker` object
    - a `groupId`
    - an `actionId` string 

    The `GuestbookModelPermission.check` and `EntryModelPermission.check`
    methods take the following three parameters:

    - a `PermissionChecker` object
    - an entity ID (either `guestbookId` or `entryId`)
    - an `actionId` string

    `BaseServiceImpl` contains a `getPermissionChecker` method which you can
    invoke to get a `PermissionChecker` object. This is possible since
    `GuestbookServiceImpl` extends `GuestbookServiceBaseImpl`, which extends
    `BaseServiceImpl`. Getting a `groupId` can be easily done using the
    `getScopeGroupId` method of `serviceContext`. The `actionId`
    string determines the particular action for which you're checking
    permissions. For this, you use a specific field of your `ActionKeys` class.
    Choosing a specific field of `ActionKeys` is less error prone than than
    manually typing the name of the string every time you want to check a
    permission. Also, by using a string from `ActionKeys`, you avoid creating a
    duplicate string.

2. Open `EntryServiceImpl` and replace the `addEntry`, `deleteEntry`, and
   `updateEntry` methods with the following ones:

        public Entry addEntry(long userId, long guestbookId, String name,
                        String email, String message, ServiceContext serviceContext)
                        throws PortalException, SystemException {

                GuestbookModelPermission.check(getPermissionChecker(),
                                serviceContext.getScopeGroupId(), ActionKeys.ADD_ENTRY);

                return EntryLocalServiceUtil.addEntry(userId, guestbookId, name, email,
                                message, serviceContext);
        }

        public Entry deleteEntry(long entryId, ServiceContext serviceContext)
                        throws PortalException, SystemException {

                EntryPermission.check(getPermissionChecker(),
                                entryId, ActionKeys.DELETE);

                return EntryLocalServiceUtil.deleteEntry(entryId, serviceContext);
        }

        public Entry updateEntry(long userId, long guestbookId, long entryId,
                        String name, String email, String message,
                        ServiceContext serviceContext) throws PortalException,
                        SystemException {

                EntryPermission.check(getPermissionChecker(),
                                entryId, ActionKeys.UPDATE);

                return EntryLocalServiceUtil.updateEntry(userId, guestbookId, entryId,
                                name, email, message, serviceContext);
        }

    The permission checks in these methods work the same way as the permissions
    checks that you added to `GuestbookServiceImpl`. For `addEntry`, you use
    `GuestbookModelPermission.check` for the permission check since adding a
    guestbook entry is a top level model action. For `deleteEntry` and
    `updateEntry`, you use `EntryPermission.check` since these operations each
    require a specific permission on a specific entity.

3. Open `GuestbookServiceImpl` and replace both `getGuestbooks` methods (this
   method is overloaded) and the `getGuestbookCount` method with these:

        public List<Guestbook> getGuestbooks(long groupId) throws SystemException {
                return guestbookPersistence.filterFindByGroupId(groupId);
        }

        public List<Guestbook> getGuestbooks(long groupId, int start, int end)
                        throws SystemException {

                return guestbookPersistence.filterFindByGroupId(groupId, start, end);
        }

        public int getGuestbooksCount(long groupId) throws SystemException {
                return guestbookPersistence.filterCountByGroupId(groupId);
        }

4. Open `EntryServiceImpl` and replace the `getEntries` methods (this method is
   overloaded) and the `getGuestbookCount` method with these:

        public List<Entry> getEntries(long groupId, long guestbookId)
                        throws SystemException {

                return entryPersistence.filterFindByG_G(groupId, guestbookId);
        }

        public List<Entry> getEntries(long groupId, long guestbookId, int start,
                        int end) throws SystemException {

                return entryPersistence.filterFindByG_G(groupId, guestbookId, start,
                                end);
        }

        public int getEntriesCount(long groupId, long guestbookId)
                        throws SystemException {

                return entryPersistence.filterCountByG_G(groupId, guestbookId);
        }

All remote service methods should include permission checks. In steps 1 and 2,
you directly invoked permission checks for the `addGuestbook`,
`deleteGuestbook`, `updateGuestbook`, `addEntry`, `deleteEntry`, and
`updateEntry` remote service methods by using the `check` methods of the
permissions utility classes: `GuestbookModelPermission`, `GuestbookPermission`,
and `EntryPermission`. In steps 3 and 4, you indirectly invoked permission
checks for the `getGuestbooks`, `getGuestbooksCount`, `getEntries`, and
`getEntriesCount` remote service methods by calling the `filterFindBy*` and
`*filterCountBy*` methods of `GuestbookPersistenceImpl` and
`EntryPersistenceImpl`. The `filterFindBy*` and `*filterCountBy*` methods are
generated by Service Builder if the following conditions are met:

- The entity has a simple primitive primary key
- The entity has permission checks registered in an XML file in your project's
    `docroot/WEB-INF/src/resource-actions` directory
- The entity has `userId` and `groupId` fields
- The finder method has a `groupId` argument in its method signature

Since it would be a very expensive operation to retrieve a large list of
guestbook or guestbook entry entities and run permission checks on each one,
Service Builder generates the `filterFindBy*` and `filterCountBy*` helper
methods in the persistence layer to handle permission checks. The permission
checking of these helper methods is done in the database, resulting in a less
expensive operation. The `filterFindBy*` and `filterCountBy*` methods work just
like the ordinary `findBy*` and `countBy*` methods in the `*PersistenceImpl`
classes except that the `filterFindBy*` and `filterCountBy*` methods include
permission checks. Instances of the `*PersistenceImpl` classes are made
available as Spring beans in the `*ServiceImpl` classes. These beans are named
`guestbookPersistence` and `entryPersistence` in `GuestbookServiceImpl` and
`EntryServiceImpl`, respectively.

## Securing Service Calls at the Portlet Layer [](id=securing-service-calls-at-the-portlet-layer)

You've now secured your remote services but you still have some work to do. In a
previous learning path, you implemented portlet action methods such as
`addGuestbook`, `addEntry`, `deleteEntry`, etc. in your `GuestbookPortlet` and
`GuestbookAdminPortlet` classes. When you did this, you ended up calling local
service methods. For example, in the `addEntry` method of `GuestbookPortlet`,
you used the following call to add a new guestbook entry:

    EntryLocalServiceUtil.addEntry(serviceContext.getUserId(),
        guestbookId, userName, email, message, serviceContext);

Calling local services from the portlet layer of your application is not
recommended. Why? Because they don't contain permission checks. Nefarious
individuals messing with URL parameters might be able to access areas of your
application that they're not authorized to access. To make sure that your
application is secure, you should only call remote services from the portlet
layer, because that's the layer that has permission checking. Thus, to secure
service calls at the portlet layer, all you have to do is replace the local
service calls with remote service calls.

+$$$

**Note:** An alternative approach to securing service calls at the portlet layer
is to manually check permissions at the portlet layer. To do so, you could
obtain a `ThemeDisplay` from the `ActionRequest` (`ThemeDisplay themeDisplay =
(ThemeDisplay) request.getAttribute(WebKeys.THEME_DISPLAY);`) and obtain a
`PermissionChecker` from the `ThemeDisplay` (`PermissionChecker
permissionChecker = themeDisplay.getPermissionChecker();`). If the user passes
the permission check, then you could call the local service method. However,
it's best to avoid rewriting permission checks whenever possible. For this
reason, if you need to wrap a service call in a permission check, it's best to
implement that service method as a remote service and to add the permission
check to the remote service. This is the pattern that Liferay uses, and that you
have followed in this Learning Path.

$$$

Use the following steps to secure the service calls in your portlet action
methods:

1. Open your `GuestbookPortlet` class and replace each local service method call
   with the corresponding remote service method call.

2. Reorganize your imports, replacing `import
   com.liferay.docs.guestbook.service.EntryLocalServiceUtil;` with `import
   com.liferay.docs.guestbook.service.EntryServiceUtil;` and `import
   com.liferay.docs.guestbook.service.GuestbookLocalServiceUtil;` with `import
   com.liferay.docs.guestbook.service.GuestbookServiceUtil;`.

3. Open your `GuestbookAdminPortlet` class and replace each local service method
   call with the corresponding remote service method call.

4. Reorganize your imports, replacing `import
   com.liferay.docs.guestbook.service.GuestbookLocalServiceUtil;` with `import
   com.liferay.docs.guestbook.service.GuestbookServiceUtil;`.

To check that you haven't made a mistake in your `GuestbookPortlet` class,
please refer to the following complete `GuestbookPortlet` class:

    package com.liferay.docs.guestbook.portlet;

    import java.io.IOException;
    import java.util.List;

    import javax.portlet.ActionRequest;
    import javax.portlet.ActionResponse;
    import javax.portlet.PortletException;
    import javax.portlet.RenderRequest;
    import javax.portlet.RenderResponse;

    import com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Entry;
    import com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Guestbook;
    import com.liferay.docs.guestbook.service.EntryServiceUtil;
    import com.liferay.docs.guestbook.service.GuestbookServiceUtil;
    import com.liferay.docs.guestbook.util.WebKeys;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.exception.PortalException;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.exception.SystemException;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.servlet.SessionErrors;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.servlet.SessionMessages;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.OrderByComparator;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.OrderByComparatorFactory;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.OrderByComparatorFactoryUtil;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.ParamUtil;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.ServiceContext;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.ServiceContextFactory;
    import com.liferay.portal.util.PortalUtil;
    import com.liferay.util.bridges.mvc.MVCPortlet;

    /**
     * Portlet implementation class GuestbookPortlet
     */
    public class GuestbookPortlet extends MVCPortlet {

        public void addEntry(ActionRequest request, ActionResponse response)
                throws PortalException, SystemException {

            ServiceContext serviceContext = ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(
                    Entry.class.getName(), request);

            String userName = ParamUtil.getString(request, "name");
            String email = ParamUtil.getString(request, "email");
            String message = ParamUtil.getString(request, "message");
            String guestbookName = ParamUtil.getString(request, "guestbookName");
            long guestbookId = ParamUtil.getLong(request, "guestbookId");
            long entryId = ParamUtil.getLong(request, "entryId");

            if (entryId > 0) {
                try {
                    EntryServiceUtil.updateEntry(serviceContext.getUserId(),
                            guestbookId, entryId, userName, email, message,
                            serviceContext);

                    SessionMessages.add(request, "entryAdded");

                    response.setRenderParameter("guestbookName", guestbookName);
                } catch (Exception e) {
                    SessionErrors.add(request, e.getClass().getName());

                    PortalUtil.copyRequestParameters(request, response);

                    response.setRenderParameter("mvcPath",
                            "/html/guestbook/edit_entry.jsp");
                }
            } else {
                try {
                    EntryServiceUtil.addEntry(serviceContext.getUserId(),
                            guestbookId, userName, email, message, serviceContext);

                    SessionMessages.add(request, "entryAdded");

                    response.setRenderParameter("guestbookName", guestbookName);
                } catch (Exception e) {
                    SessionErrors.add(request, e.getClass().getName());

                    PortalUtil.copyRequestParameters(request, response);

                    response.setRenderParameter("mvcPath",
                            "/html/guestbook/edit_entry.jsp");
                }
            }
        }

        public void deleteEntry(ActionRequest request, ActionResponse response) {

            long entryId = ParamUtil.getLong(request, "entryId");
            long guestbookId = ParamUtil.getLong(request, "guestbookId");

            try {
                ServiceContext serviceContext = ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(
                        Entry.class.getName(), request);

                response.setRenderParameter("guestbookId",
                        Long.toString(guestbookId));

                EntryServiceUtil.deleteEntry(entryId, serviceContext);
            } catch (Exception e) {

                SessionErrors.add(request, e.getClass().getName());
            }
        }

        public void addGuestbook(ActionRequest request, ActionResponse response)
                throws PortalException, SystemException {

            ServiceContext serviceContext = ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(
                    Guestbook.class.getName(), request);

            String name = ParamUtil.getString(request, "guestbookName");

            try {
                GuestbookServiceUtil.addGuestbook(serviceContext.getUserId(), name,
                        serviceContext);

                SessionMessages.add(request, "guestbookAdded");

            } catch (Exception e) {
                SessionErrors.add(request, e.getMessage());

                response.setRenderParameter("mvcPath",
                        "/html/guestbook/edit_guestbook.jsp");
            }
        }

        @Override
        public void render(RenderRequest renderRequest,
                RenderResponse renderResponse) throws PortletException, IOException {

            try {

                Guestbook guestbook = null;

                ServiceContext serviceContext = ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(
                        Guestbook.class.getName(), renderRequest);

                String guestbookName = "";

                long groupId = serviceContext.getScopeGroupId();

                // First, get all the guestbooks to populate the tabs
                List<Guestbook> guestbooks = GuestbookServiceUtil
                        .getGuestbooks(groupId);

                if (guestbooks.size() == 0) {
                    guestbook = GuestbookServiceUtil.addGuestbook(
                            serviceContext.getUserId(), "Main", serviceContext);

                    // If we had to create the default guestbook, put it in the
                    // request
                    renderRequest.setAttribute(WebKeys.GUESTBOOK, guestbook);
                }

                // Now we check to see if the user selected a guestbook
                guestbook = (Guestbook) renderRequest
                        .getAttribute(WebKeys.GUESTBOOK);

                if (guestbook == null) {

                    // The user still could have selected a guestbook
                    guestbookName = ParamUtil.getString(renderRequest,
                            "guestbookName");
                    if (guestbookName.equalsIgnoreCase("")) {

                        guestbook = guestbooks.get(0);

                    } else {

                        OrderByComparatorFactory orderByComparatorFactory = OrderByComparatorFactoryUtil
                                .getOrderByComparatorFactory();
                        OrderByComparator orderByComparator = orderByComparatorFactory
                                .create("guestbook", "name", true);

                        guestbook = GuestbookServiceUtil.getGuestbookByG_N(
                                serviceContext.getScopeGroupId(), guestbookName,
                                orderByComparator);
                    }

                }

                renderRequest.setAttribute(WebKeys.GUESTBOOK, guestbook);

            } catch (Exception e) {

                throw new PortletException(e);
            }

            super.render(renderRequest, renderResponse);
        }

    }

To check that you haven't made a mistake in your `GuestbookAdminPortlet` class,
please refer to the following complete `GuestbookAdminPortlet` class:

    package com.liferay.docs.guestbook.portlet;

    import javax.portlet.ActionRequest;
    import javax.portlet.ActionResponse;

    import com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Guestbook;
    import com.liferay.docs.guestbook.service.GuestbookServiceUtil;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.exception.PortalException;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.exception.SystemException;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.servlet.SessionErrors;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.servlet.SessionMessages;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.ParamUtil;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.ServiceContext;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.ServiceContextFactory;
    import com.liferay.util.bridges.mvc.MVCPortlet;

    /**
     * Portlet implementation class GuestbookAdminPortlet
     */
    public class GuestbookAdminPortlet extends MVCPortlet {

            public void addGuestbook(ActionRequest request, ActionResponse response)
                            throws PortalException, SystemException {

                    ServiceContext serviceContext = ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(
                                    Guestbook.class.getName(), request);

                    String name = ParamUtil.getString(request, "name");

                    try {
                            GuestbookServiceUtil.addGuestbook(serviceContext.getUserId(),
                                            name, serviceContext);
                            
                            SessionMessages.add(request, "guestbookAdded");
                    } catch (PortalException e) {
                            SessionErrors.add(request, e.getClass().getName());

                            response.setRenderParameter("mvcPath",
                                            "/html/guestbookadmin/edit_guestbook.jsp");
                    }
            }

            public void updateGuestbook(ActionRequest request, ActionResponse response)
                            throws PortalException, SystemException {

                    ServiceContext serviceContext = ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(
                                    Guestbook.class.getName(), request);

                    String name = ParamUtil.getString(request, "name");
                    long guestbookId = ParamUtil.getLong(request, "guestbookId");

                    try {
                            GuestbookServiceUtil.updateGuestbook(serviceContext.getUserId(), guestbookId,
                                            name, serviceContext);
                            
                            SessionMessages.add(request, "guestbookUpdated");
                    } catch (PortalException pe) {
                            SessionErrors.add(request, pe.getClass().getName());

                            response.setRenderParameter("mvcPath",
                                            "/html/guestbookadmin/edit_guestbook.jsp");
                    }
            }

            public void deleteGuestbook(ActionRequest request, ActionResponse response)
                            throws PortalException, SystemException {

                    ServiceContext serviceContext = ServiceContextFactory.getInstance(
                                    Guestbook.class.getName(), request);

                    long guestbookId = ParamUtil.getLong(request, "guestbookId");
                    
                    try {
                            GuestbookServiceUtil.deleteGuestbook(guestbookId, serviceContext);
                            
                            SessionMessages.add(request, "guestbookDeleted");
                    } catch (PortalException pe) {
                            SessionErrors.add(request, pe.getClass().getName());
                    }
            }

    }

Now that you've implemented permission checks at the portlet layer, users
without the proper permissions cannot add, update, or delete a guestbook or a
guestbook entry entity. Even if such a user manually entered a URL pointing to
one of your portlet action methods, the portlet action now calls a remote
service. The permission check in the remote service would fail and the user's
request would be aborted. Excellent work on securing your application's
services!
