---
header-id: liferay-workspace
---

# Liferay Workspace

[TOC levels=1-4]

A *Liferay Workspace* is a generated environment that is built to hold and
manage your Liferay projects. This workspace is intended to aid in the
management of Liferay projects by providing various build scripts and configured
properties. You can download the
[Liferay Project SDK installer](https://sourceforge.net/projects/lportal/files/Liferay%20IDE/)
and run it to install
[Blade CLI](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/blade-cli) (default
CLI for workspace), initialize a new Liferay Workspace, and download @ide@.

Liferay Workspace is the official way to create/manage @product-ver@ projects
using Gradle. Do you prefer Maven over Gradle? You can also generate a
Maven-based workspace.

You'll cover the following topics in this section:

- [Installing Liferay Workspace](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/installing-liferay-workspace)
- [Creating a Liferay Workspace](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/creating-a-liferay-workspace)
- [Importing a Liferay Workspace](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/importing-a-liferay-workspace-into-an-ide)
- [Setting Proxy Requirements](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/setting-proxy-requirements-for-liferay-workspace)
- [Adding a Bundle](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/adding-a-liferay-bundle-to-liferay-workspace)
- [Setting Environment Configurations](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/setting-environment-configurations-for-liferay-workspace)
- [Building Node.js Themes](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/building-node-js-themes-in-liferay-workspace)
- [Building Gradle/Maven Themes](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/building-gradle-maven-themes-in-liferay-workspace)
- [Managing the Target Platform](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/managing-the-target-platform)
- [Validating Modules Against the Target Platform](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/validating-modules-against-the-target-platform)
- [Leveraging Docker](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/leveraging-docker)
- [Updating Liferay Workspace](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/updating-liferay-workspace)
- [Updating Default Plugins Provided by Liferay Workspace](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/updating-default-plugins-provided-by-liferay-workspace)

Liferay Workspaces can be used in many different development environments, which
makes it flexible and applicable to many different developers. For example, a
Liferay Workspace easily integrates with Eclipse and IntelliJ, providing a
seamless development experience. See how to
[install](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/installing-liferay-workspace)
and
[create](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/creating-a-liferay-workspace)
a Liferay Workspace for more information.

You'll learn about workspace's anatomy and development lifecycle next.

## Workspace Anatomy

A Liferay Workspace offers a development environment that can be configured to
fit your development needs. Properties are available to help manage default and
optional folders. This provides you the power to customize your workspace's
folder structure any way you'd like. The top-level files/folder of a Liferay
(Gradle) Workspace are outlined below:

- `bundles` (generated): the default folder for @product@ bundles.
- `configs`: holds the configuration files for different environments. These
  files serve as your global configuration files for all @product@ servers and
  projects residing in your workspace. To learn more about using the `configs`
  folder, see the [Testing Projects](#testing-projects) section.
- `ext` (generated): holds the Ext OSGi modules and Ext plugins.
- `gradle`: holds the Gradle Wrapper used by your workspace.
- `modules`: holds your custom modules.
- `plugins-sdk` (generated): holds plugins to migrate from previous releases.
  These project types should eventually be migrated to the `wars` folder, if
  possible. This is targeted for @product@ 7.0 to provide a way to migrate from
  the Plugins SDK to Liferay Workspace. See the
  [Using a Plugins SDK from Your Workspace](/docs/tutorials/7-0/-/knowledge_base/tutorials/configuring-a-liferay-workspace#using-a-plugins-sdk-from-your-workspace)
  section for more information. The Plugins SDK is no longer available for
  @product-ver@.
- `themes`: holds Node.js-style themes that use the Liferay JS Theme Toolkit, 
  which are built using the Liferay Theme Generator.
- `wars`: holds traditional WAR-style web application projects and theme
  projects (i.e., generated by the
  [`theme`](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/theme-template) project
  template).
- `build.gradle`: the common Gradle build file.
- `gradle.properties`: specifies the workspace's project locations and @product@
  server configuration globally. 
- `gradle-local.properties`: sets user-specific properties for your workspace.
  This lets multiple users use a single workspace, letting them configure
  specific properties for the workspace on their own machine.
- `gradlew`: executes the Gradle command wrapper.
- `settings.gradle`: applies plugins to the workspace and configures its
  dependencies.

If you're using a workspace generated for Maven projects, your folder hierarchy
is the same, except the Gradle build files are swapped out for a `pom.xml` file.

Visit your workspace's `gradle.properties` file for a list of properties (with
descriptions) you can define to adapt your workspace. For a Maven-based
workspace, see the
[Bundle Support Plugin](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/bundle-support-plugin)
article for info on adapting your Maven workspace.

If you'd like to keep the global Gradle properties the same, but want to change
them for yourself only (perhaps for local testing), you can override the
`gradle.properties` file with your own `gradle-local.properties` file.

Next, you'll learn about workspace's development lifecycle.

## Development Lifecycle

Liferay Workspaces offer a full development lifecycle for your projects to make
your Liferay development easier than ever. The development lifecycle includes

- [Creating projects](#creating-projects)
- [Building projects](#building-projects)
- [Deploying projects](#deploying-projects)
- [Testing projects](#testing-projects)
- [Releasing projects](#releasing-projects)

You'll learn about each lifecycle option next.

### Creating Projects

Workspace provides a slew of
[project templates](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/project-templates)
that you can use to create many different types of Liferay projects.

You can also configure where to generate certain projects (modules, themes,
WARs, etc.). These settings are documented in the `gradle.properties` file. See
the
[Creating a Project](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/creating-a-project)
article for more information.

Liferay Workspace manages theme projects in two separate folders based on how
they're created:

- [Liferay Theme Generator](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/theme-generator)
  (Node.js-based themes that use the Liferay JS Theme Toolkit)
- [Project template/archetype](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/theme-template)
  (Gradle/Maven-based themes)

Liferay Workspace offers an environment where developers can use the Liferay
Theme Generator to create themes and their work can be seamlessly integrated
into their overall DevOps strategy. You can leverage the Liferay Theme Generator
to
[create Node.js-based themes inside workspace](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/building-node-js-themes-in-liferay-workspace)
or you can leverage it externally and copy themes into Workspace.

Workspace also offers a
[traditional Java-based theme approach](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/building-gradle-maven-themes-in-liferay-workspace)
(leveraging Gradle/Maven) for those that can't use the Liferay JS Theme
Toolkit's tools in their CI environment.

### Building Projects

Liferay Workspace abstracts many build requirements away so you can focus on
developing projects instead of worrying about how to build them. This is done by
incorporating a slew of plugins under the hood to allow for easily
accessible tooling. See the
[Gradle Plugins](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/gradle-plugins)
and
[Maven Plugins](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/maven-plugins)
sections for information on some of the plugins provided by workspace.

Gradle-based workspaces also include a Gradle wrapper in its ROOT folder (e.g.,
`gradlew`), which you can leverage to execute Gradle commands. This means that
you can run familiar Gradle build commands (e.g., `build`, `clean`, `compile`,
etc.) from a Liferay Workspace without having Gradle installed on your machine.
For Maven-based workspaces, Maven build commands are supported (e.g., `package`,
`verify`, `deploy`, etc.).

Liferay Workspace lets you build your projects out-of-the-box without the hassle
of manual build configurations.

### Deploying Projects

Liferay Workspace provides easy-to-use deployment mechanisms that let you deploy
your project to a Liferay server without any custom configuration. To learn more
about deploying projects from a workspace, visit the
[Deploying a Project](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/deploying-a-project)
article.

### Testing Projects

Liferay provides many configuration settings for @product-ver@. Configuring
several different @product@ installations to simulate/test certain behaviors can
become cumbersome and time consuming. With Liferay Workspace, you can easily
organize environment settings and generate an environment installation with
those settings.

Liferay Workspace provides the `configs` folder, which lets you configure
different environments in the same workspace. For example, you could configure
separate @product@ environment settings for development, testing, and production
in a single Liferay Workspace. So how does it work?

The `configs` folder offers six subfolders:

`common`: holds a common configuration that you want applied to all
environments.

`dev`: holds the development configuration.

`docker`: holds the configuration for a Docker container.

`local`: holds the configuration intended for testing locally.

`prod`: holds the configuration for a production site.

`uat`: holds the configuration for a UAT site.

You're not limited to just these environments. You can create any subfolder in
the `configs` folder (e.g., `aws`, `test`, etc.) to simulate any environment.
Each environment folder can supply its own database, `portal-ext.properties`,
Elasticsearch, etc. The files in each folder overlay your @product@
installation, which you generate from within workspace.

![Figure 1: The `configs/common` and `configs/[environment]` overlay you @product@ bundle when it's generated.](../../../images/workspace-configs.png)

When workspace generates a @product@ bundle, these things happen:

1.  Configuration files found in the `configs/common` folder are applied to the
    @product@ bundle.

2.  The configured workspace environment (`dev`, `local`, etc.) is applied on
    top of any existing configurations from the `common` folder.

See the
[Setting Environment Configurations for Liferay Workspace](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/setting-environment-configurations-for-liferay-workspace)
article for more information.

### Releasing Projects

Liferay Workspace does not provide a built-in release mechanism, but there are
easy ways to use external release tools with workspace. The most popular choice
is uploading your projects to a Maven Nexus repository. You could also use other
release tools like [Artifactory](https://www.jfrog.com/artifactory/).

Uploading projects to a remote repository is useful if you need to share them
with other non-workspace projects. Also, if you're ready for your projects to be
in the spotlight, uploading them to a public remote repository gives other
developers the chance to use them.

For more instructions on how to set up a Maven Nexus repository for your
workspace's projects, see the
[Creating a Maven Repository](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/creating-a-maven-repository)
and
[Deploying Liferay Maven Artifacts to a Repository](/docs/reference/7-2/-/knowledge_base/reference/deploying-liferay-maven-artifacts-to-a-repository)
articles.
