# Creating a Module JAR Using Maven [](id=creating-a-module-jar-using-maven)

If you have an existing Liferay module built with Maven that you created from
scratch, or you're upgrading your Maven project from a previous version of
@product@, your project probably can't generate an executable OSGi JAR. Don't
fret! You can do this by making a few minor configurations in your module's
POMs.

+$$$

**Note:** If you used Liferay's Maven archetypes to generate your module
project, the project already has the Maven plugins required to generate an OSGi
JAR.

$$$

Continue on to see how this is done.

1.  In your project's `pom.xml` file, add the
    [BND Maven Plugin](http://njbartlett.name/2015/03/27/announcing-bnd-maven-plugin.html)
    declaration:

        <plugin>
            <groupId>biz.aQute.bnd</groupId>
            <artifactId>bnd-maven-plugin</artifactId>
            <version>3.3.0</version>
            <executions>
                <execution>
                    <goals>
                        <goal>bnd-process</goal>
                    </goals>
                </execution>
            </executions>
            <dependencies>
                <dependency>
                    <groupId>biz.aQute.bnd</groupId>
                    <artifactId>biz.aQute.bndlib</artifactId>
                    <version>3.2.0</version>
                </dependency>
                <dependency>
                    <groupId>com.liferay</groupId>
                    <artifactId>com.liferay.ant.bnd</artifactId>
                    <version>2.0.41</version>
                </dependency>
            </dependencies>
        </plugin>

    The BND Maven plugin prepares all your Maven module's resources (e.g.,
    `MANIFEST.MF`) and inserts them into the generated
    `[Maven Project]/target/classes` folder. This plugin prepares your module to
    be packaged as an OSGi JAR deployable to @product@.

    +$$$

    **Note:** Although WABs can be generated using the `bnd-maven-plugin`, this
    is not supported by Liferay. WABs should be created as a standard WAR
    project and deployed to the
    [Liferay WAB Generator](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/using-the-wab-generator),
    which generates a WAB for you.

    $$$

2.  In your project's `pom.xml` file, add the
    [Maven JAR Plugin](http://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-jar-plugin/)
    declaration:

        <build>
            <plugins>
                <plugin>
                    <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
                    <artifactId>maven-jar-plugin</artifactId>
                    <version>2.6</version>
                    <configuration>
                        <archive>
                            <manifestFile>${project.build.outputDirectory}/META-INF/MANIFEST.MF</manifestFile>
                        </archive>
                    </configuration>
                </plugin>
            </plugins>
        </build>

    The Maven JAR plugin builds your Maven project as a JAR file, including the
    resources generated by the BND Maven plugin. The above configuration also
    sets the default project `MANIFEST.MF` file path for your project, which is
    essential when packaging your module using the BND Maven plugin. By default,
    the Maven JAR Plugin ignores the `target/classes/META-INF/MANIFEST.MF`
    generated by the BND Maven plugin, so you must explicitly set it as the
    manifest file so it's included properly in the generated JAR file.

3.  Make sure you've added a [bnd.bnd file](http://bnd.bndtools.org/) to your
    Liferay Maven project, residing in the same folder as your project's
    `pom.xml` file.

4.  Build your Maven OSGi JAR by running

        mvn package

    Your Maven JAR is generated in your project's `/target` folder. You can
    deploy it manually into @product@'s `/deploy` folder, or you can configure
    your project to deploy automatically to @product@ by following the
    [Deploying a Project Built with Maven to @product@](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/deploying-a-module-built-with-maven-to-product)
    tutorial.

Fantastic! You've configured your Liferay Maven project to package itself into a
deployable OSGi module.
