# Creating Pages [](id=creating-pages)

From the *Site Pages* page, you can add a page or child page to any existing 
page or page set by clicking the `+` button in the top right corner. Because 
*Public Pages* is selected on the top, clicking `+` here adds a top level page 
making it a sibling page of the Welcome page. You can, however, nest pages as 
deeply as you like. To create a sub-page under the Welcome page, click the `+` 
button next to *Welcome*.

Adding a child page creates child pages in the hierarchy below the page you've 
selected. You can nest pages as deep as you like and you can manage that 
hierarchy through Navigation Menus [link]. 

Once you've clicked on the `+` icon, whether to add a top level or child page, 
you're directed to the *Select Template* page, where you select the type of 
page you are creating.

**Full Page Application:** creates a page that displays a single
full page application.

**Layout:** creates a page where you can select a layout template, which 
defines the number of rows and columns and add applications to your page in a 
custom layout.

**Panel:** can have any number of applications on it, as selected by an
administrator, but only one will be displayed at a time. Users select which
portlet they want to use from a menu on the left side of the page and the
selected portlet takes up the entire page. 

**Embedded:** display content from another website inside of your instance.
An administrator can set a URL from in the page management interface and that
page will appear in the context and within the navigation of your Liferay
instance.

**Content:** created from a template defined by page templates.

Now that you know the basics of adding site pages, you can start working on the
Lunar Resort site. If you're not currently on the site you're interested in
adding pages to, navigate to Site Administration in the Menu, select the compass
icon next to the current site name, and select the site you wish to edit.

As stated previously, if you ever need to modify the page you've created for
your site, select *Configure* from the Options menu for the page from *Site 
Pages*. When configuring a specific page, you're given more options than when 
you were creating a new page. These extended options for configuring specific 
pages are covered in more detail later in this section.

There are also configuration options that are only available for either
individual pages or page groups only. You'll learn about options available for
both instances.

You should be able to define and manage pages in Liferay at this point so next,
you'll look at the options you have available for configuring your public or
private pages as a whole, and the individual pages residing within those groups.
