# Extending the Permissions Scheme with Wrapper Classes

When extending a portlet's permissions scheme, it's best practice to create
wrapper classes that extend your model entity wrappers. This gives your
permissions methods a unique place to reside. By doing this, each entity of
your guestbook is wrapped with permissions you add to wrapper classes. This
enables you to easily create actions and permissions for each entity. 

You may have noticed when you were creating your guestbook and entry managed
beans that the `com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Guestbook` and
`com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Entry` objects were used to create and manage
your guestbook and entry entities. The wrapper classes you create in this
section will replace those classes, making permissions resources available in
your managed beans. Before updating your managed beans, you'll need to create
the wrapper classes first. You'll start with creating the `Guestbook` wrapper
class. 

1. In the Guestbook portlet's `docroot/WEB-INF/src` directory, add a new package
   named `com.liferay.docs.guestbook.wrappers`. 

2. Right-click the `com.liferay.docs.guestbook.wrappers` package and select
   *New* &rarr; *Class*. Give it the name `Guestbook` and in the *Superclass*
   field, browse for the `GuestbookWrapper` class. Then click *Finish*. 

    The `GuestbookWrapper` class was generated by Service Builder, and
    implements the guestbook model you were referring to previously. 

3. You'll need to define an explicit constructor since the implicit super
   constructor `GuestbookWrapper()` is undefined for the default constructor.
   Add the following constructor: 

        public Guestbook(com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Guestbook guestbook) {
            super(guestbook);
        }

4. Hover your mouse over the `Guestbook` class name and you'll notice a few
   options appear. Select the *Add generated serial version ID*. The following
   variable with a similar ID is added to your class: 

        private static final long serialVersionUID = -420986486105631030L;

    Since this class is *Serializable*, it's best practice to create a serial
    version ID. [Serialization](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serialization)
    translates the class' state into a format that can be stored and rebuilt on
    your local machine or across a network to other computer environments. 

Your `Guestbook` wrapper class is created. Although it is very bare bones at the
moment, this class gives a good starting place for additional
permissions-related methods to reside. Since you now want your guestbook bean to
use the `Guestbook` wrapper class instead of the `Guestbook` model class, you'll
need to make a few adjustments in your managed bean. 

1. In the `GuestbookBacking` bean, replace the `import
com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Guestbook;` statement with `import
com.liferay.docs.guestbook.wrappers.Guestbook;`. 

    You'll notice error markings appear throughout the class. Some error
    markings in your class are related to using a `-Util` class. These code
    statements need to be adjusted to work with your new wrapper class, which
    you'll do next. 

2. Wrap each error marked `-Util` call with `new Guestbook(...)`. For example,
   `GuestbookUtil.create(0L);` should look like `new
   Guestbook(GuestbookUtil.create(0L));`. 
   
    Once you finish doing this to all the `-Util` calls, you'll have two
    remaining errors markings, which will require similar changes. 

3. In the `getGuestbooks()` method, replace `guestbooks.add(guestbook);` with 
   `guestbooks.add(new Guestbook(guestbook));`. 

4. In the `getSelectedGuestbook()` method, replace the following: 

        selectedGuestbook = firstGuestbookByName;

    with:

        selectedGuestbook = new Guestbook(firstGuestbookByName);

Awesome! Your guestbook bean is now using your new `Guestbook` wrapper class!

Next, you'll create the `Entry` wrapper class, which will accomplish the same
things as the `Guestbook` wrapper class, but for entries. 

1. Right-click the `com.liferay.docs.guestbook.wrappers` package and select
   *New* &rarr; *Class*. Give it the name `Entry` and in the *Superclass*
   field, browse for the `EntryWrapper` class. Then click *Finish*. 

2. Define the explicit constructor, similarly to what you did in the `Guestbook`
   class: 

        public Entry(com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Entry entry) {
            super(entry);
        }

3. Generate the `serialVersionUID` by hovering your mouse over the class name
   and selecting *Add generated serial version ID*. 

4. Open the `EntryBacking` bean and replace the `import
   com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Entry;` statement with `import
   com.liferay.docs.guestbook.wrappers.Entry;`. Repeat this step for the
   `GuestbookBacking` bean, as well. 

5. Just as you did previously, you'll need to modify a few code statements to
   resolve errors dealing with switching to the `Entry` wrapper class from the
   model class. First, in the `EntryBacking` bean's `add()` method, replace
   `Entry entry = EntryUtil.create(0L);` with the following: 

        Entry entry = new Entry(EntryUtil.create(0L));

6. In the `getEntries()` method of the `GuestbookBacking` bean, replace
   `entries.add(entry);` with `entries.add(new Entry(entry));`. 

You've successfully migrated your backing beans from using the model entity to a
wrapper entity! Now each instance of your guestbook and entry entities will be
wrapped with any permissions configured in your new wrapper classes. To take
advantage of your new wrapper classes, you'll add permissions methods to them
relating to each entity. In the next section, you'll test out the extended
permissions scheme by adding a permission to your wrapper classes. 
