# Change Log Builder Gradle Plugin

The Change Log Builder Gradle plugin lets you generate and maintain a
change log file based on the Git commits in your project. A change log file
generated by this plugin looks like this

```ini
#
# Bundle Version 1.0.1
#
9c77ff4c95cb1a325db3bdd089be105206e8b63c^..b421f00ac84b065685b131833fecc594fc01c760=LPS-123 LPS-1321

#
# Bundle Version 1.0.2
#
b421f00ac84b065685b131833fecc594fc01c760^..bc15d8d84e12b9544f78e4e3743c510dbaec2d89=LPS-456
```

Every time the [`buildChangeLog`](#buildchangelog) task is executed, a new line
is added to the change log, which lists all Git [commit prefixes](#ticketidprefixes)
(usually issue ticket IDs) that occurred in a certain range. The end of the
range is always the tip of the current branch. The start range can vary,
depending on the case:

- If `buildChangeLog` has never been executed for the project, the change log
does not exist. Therefore, the most recent commit from two years ago is used for
the range start.
- If a change log already exists for your project, the start range begins at the
range end of the last line in the change log.

## Usage

To use the plugin, include it in your build script:

```gradle
buildscript {
	dependencies {
		classpath group: "com.liferay", name: "com.liferay.gradle.plugins.change.log.builder", version: "1.0.3"
	}

	repositories {
		maven {
			url "https://cdn.lfrs.sl/repository.liferay.com/nexus/content/groups/public"
		}
	}
}

apply plugin: "com.liferay.change.log.builder"
```

## Tasks

The plugin adds one task to your project:

Name | Depends On | Type | Description
---- | ---------- | ---- | -----------
<a name="buildchangelog"></a>`buildChangeLog` | \- | [`BuildChangeLogTask`](#buildchangelogtask) | Builds the change log file for this project.

The `buildChangeLog` task is automatically configured with sensible defaults,
depending on whether the [`java`](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_plugin.html)
plugin is applied:

Property Name | Default Value
------------- | -------------
[`changeLogHeader`](#changelogheader) | `"Bundle Version ${project.version}"`
[`changeLogFile`](#changelogfile) | <p>**If the `java` plugin is applied:** The `META-INF/liferay-releng.changelog` file in the first `resources` directory of the `main` source set (by default, `src/main/resources/META-INF/liferay-releng.changelog`).</p><p>**Otherwise:** `"${project.projectDir}/liferay-releng.changelog"`</p>
[`dirs`](#dirs) | `[project.projectDir]`

### BuildChangeLogTask

#### Task Properties

Property Name | Type | Default Value | Description
------------- | ---- | ------------- | -----------
<a name="changelogfile"></a>`changeLogFile` | `File` | `null` | The change log file to build.
<a name="changelogheader"></a>`changeLogHeader` | `String` | `null` | The header for the new line in the change log.
`dirs` | `FileCollection` | `[]` | The directories to consider when listing the commits in the range specified.
`gitDir` | `File` | `project.rootDir` | The base directory to start searching for the `.git` directory. The search proceeds in all the ancestors of the directory specified.
`rangeEnd` | `String` | `null` | The hash of the last commit to consider. If not set, it corresponds to the range end of the last line in the change log, or the most recent commit from at least two years ago if the change log file does not exist yet.
`rangeStart` | `String` | `null` | The hash of the first commit to consider. If not set, it corresponds to the hash of the tip of the current branch.
<a name="ticketidprefixes"></a>`ticketIdPrefixes` | `Set<String>` | `["CLDSVCS", "LPS", "SOS", "SYNC"]` | The valid prefix of the Git commit messages to add to the change log. For example, if a commit message is `"LPS-123 Bugfix"`, `"LPS-123"` will be added to the change log.

The properties of type `File` support any type that can be resolved by [`project.file`](https://docs.gradle.org/current/dsl/org.gradle.api.Project.html#org.gradle.api.Project:file(java.css.Object)).
Moreover, it is possible to use Closures and Callables as values for the
`String` properties to defer evaluation until task execution.

#### Task Methods

Method | Description
------ | -----------
`BuildChangeLogTask dirs(Iterable<?> dirs)` | Adds directories to consider when listing the commits in the range specified.
`BuildChangeLogTask dirs(Object... dirs)` | Adds directories to consider when listing the commits in the range specified.
`BuildChangeLogTask ticketIdPrefixes(Iterable<String> ticketIdPrefixes)` | Adds valid prefixes of the Git commit messages to add to the change log.
`BuildChangeLogTask ticketIdPrefixes(String... ticketIdPrefixes)` | Adds valid prefixes of the Git commit messages to add to the change log.