# SOAP Web Services [](id=soap-web-services)

You can access Liferay's web services via Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) 
over HTTP. The packaging protocol is SOAP, and the transport protocol is HTTP. 

+$$$

**Note:** An authentication token must accompany each Liferay web service
invocation. For details, see the tutorial on 
[Service Security Layers](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/service-security-layers). 

$$$

As an example, consider some example SOAP web service clients for Liferay's 
`Company`, `User`, and `UserGroup` services that perform these tasks: 

1. List each user group the user with the screen name *test* belongs to. 

2. Add a new user group named *MyGroup*.

3. Add your Liferay instance's administrative user to the new user group. For
   demonstration purposes, you'll use an administrative user whose email 
   address is `test@liferay.com`.

You'll use these SOAP related classes:

    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.model.CompanySoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.model.CompanySoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.model.UserGroupSoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.model.UserGroupSoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.CompanyServiceSoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.CompanyServiceSoapServiceLocator;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserGroupServiceSoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserGroupServiceSoapServiceLocator;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserServiceSoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserServiceSoapServiceLocator;

Can you see the naming convention for SOAP related classes? These classes have
either `-ServiceSoapServiceLocator`, `-ServiceSoap`, or `-Soap` as suffixes. The
`-ServiceSoapServiceLocator` class finds the `-ServiceSoap` class via the 
service's URL you provide. The `-ServiceSoap` class is the interface to the
services specified in the Web Services Definition Language (WSDL) file for each 
service. The `-Soap` classes are the serializable implementations of the models. 

So how do you determine the URLs for these services? This is a most excellent 
question! You can see a list of the services deployed on your Liferay instance 
by opening your browser to the following URL: 

    http://[host]:[port]/api/axis

Note that this URL only lists services in the portal context. To learn how to 
find services in other contexts in your Liferay instance, see the SOAP sections 
in the tutorial 
[Creating Remote Services](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/creating-remote-services). 

Regardless of the context you're viewing SOAP services in, each web service is 
listed with its name, operations, and a link to its WSDL file. For example, 
here's the list of secure web services listed for `UserGroup`: 

- `Portal_UserGroupService` (wsdl)
    - `addGroupUserGroups`
    - `addTeamUserGroups`
    - `addUserGroup`
    - `deleteUserGroup`
    - `fetchUserGroup`
    - `getUserGroup`
    - `getUserGroups`
    - `getUserUserGroups`
    - `unsetGroupUserGroups`
    - `unsetTeamUserGroups`
    - `updateUserGroup`

Note that some of these methods are overloaded.

Liferay uses Service Builder to automatically generate JSON and SOAP web service 
interfaces. If you haven't used Service Builder before, see this 
[introductory tutorial](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/what-is-service-builder). 

The WSDL file is written in XML and provides a model for describing and
locating the web service. Here's a WSDL excerpt of the `addUserGroup` operation 
of `UserGroup`:

    <wsdl:operation name="addUserGroup" parameterOrder="name description">
        <wsdl:input message="intf:addUserGroupRequest" name="addUserGroupRequest"/>
        <wsdl:output message="intf:addUserGroupResponse" name="addUserGroupResponse"/>
    </wsdl:operation>

To use the service, you pass in the WSDL URL along with your login credentials
to the SOAP service locator for your service. The next section shows you an 
example of this. 

## SOAP Java Client [](id=soap-java-client)

Now you'll learn how to invoke Liferay's SOAP web services. As an example, 
you'll do this by setting up a Java web services client in Eclipse. You can use 
Eclipse's Web Service Client wizard to either create a new web service client 
project or add a client to an existing project. You must add a new web service 
client to your project for each service that you want to consume in your client 
code. For this example, you'll build a web service client to invoke Liferay's 
`Company`, `User`, and `UserGroup` services. 

To create a new web service client project in Eclipse, click *File* &rarr;
*New* &rarr; *Other...*, then expand the *Web Services* category. Select *Web
Service Client*. 

For each client you create, you're prompted to enter the service definition
(WSDL) for the desired service. Since your example web service client needs 
Liferay's `Company`, `User`, and `UserGroup` services, enter the following 
WSDLs:

    http://localhost:8080/api/axis/Portal_CompanyService?wsdl

    http://localhost:8080/api/axis/Portal_UserService?wsdl

    http://localhost:8080/api/axis/Portal_UserGroupService?wsdl

![Figure 1: Service Definition](../../images/api-web-svc-wsdl.png)

When you specify a WSDL, Eclipse automatically adds the auxiliary files and
libraries required to consume that web service. After you've created your web 
service client project using one of the above WSDLs, you need to create 
additional clients in the project using the remaining WSDLs. To create an 
additional client in an existing project, right-click on the project and select
*New* &rarr; *Other* &rarr; *Web Service Client*. Click *Next*, enter the WSDL, 
and complete the wizard. 

The following code locates and invokes operations to create a new user group 
named `MyUserGroup` and add a user with the screen name *test* to it. Create a
`LiferaySoapClient.java` file in your web service client project and add this 
code to it. If you create this class in a package other than the one that's 
specified in this code, replace the package with your package. To run the client 
from Eclipse, make sure that your Liferay server is running, right-click the 
`LiferaySoapClient.java` class, and select *Run as Java application*. Check your 
console to check that your service calls succeeded. 

    package com.liferay.test;

    import java.net.URL;

    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.model.CompanySoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.kernel.model.UserGroupSoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.CompanyServiceSoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.CompanyServiceSoapServiceLocator;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserGroupServiceSoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserGroupServiceSoapServiceLocator;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserServiceSoap;
    import com.liferay.portal.service.http.UserServiceSoapServiceLocator;

    public class LiferaySoapClient {

        public static void main(String[] args) {

            try {
                String remoteUser = "test";
                String password = "test";
                String virtualHost = "localhost";

                String groupName = "MyUserGroup";

                String serviceCompanyName = "Portal_CompanyService";
                String serviceUserName = "Portal_UserService";
                String serviceUserGroupName = "Portal_UserGroupService";

                long userId = 0;

                // Locate the Company
                CompanyServiceSoapServiceLocator locatorCompany =
                    new CompanyServiceSoapServiceLocator();

                CompanyServiceSoap soapCompany =
                    locatorCompany.getPortal_CompanyService(
                        _getURL(remoteUser, password, serviceCompanyName,
                                true));

                CompanySoap companySoap =
                    soapCompany.getCompanyByVirtualHost(virtualHost);

                // Locate the User service
                UserServiceSoapServiceLocator locatorUser =
                    new UserServiceSoapServiceLocator();
                UserServiceSoap userSoap = locatorUser.getPortal_UserService(
                    _getURL(remoteUser, password, serviceUserName, true));

                // Get the ID of the remote user
                userId = userSoap.getUserIdByScreenName(
                    companySoap.getCompanyId(), remoteUser);
                System.out.println("userId for user named " + remoteUser +
                        " is " + userId);

                // Locate the UserGroup service
                UserGroupServiceSoapServiceLocator locator =
                    new UserGroupServiceSoapServiceLocator();
                UserGroupServiceSoap usergroupsoap =
                    locator.getPortal_UserGroupService(
                        _getURL(remoteUser, password, serviceUserGroupName,
                                true));

                // Get the user's user groups
                UserGroupSoap[] usergroups = usergroupsoap.getUserUserGroups(
                        userId);

                System.out.println("User groups for userId " + userId + " ...");
                for (int i = 0; i < usergroups.length; i++) {
                    System.out.println("\t" + usergroups[i].getName());
                }

                // Adds the user group if it does not already exist
                String groupDesc = "My new user group";
                UserGroupSoap newUserGroup = null;

                boolean userGroupAlreadyExists = false;
                try {
                    newUserGroup = usergroupsoap.getUserGroup(groupName);
                    if (newUserGroup != null) {
                        System.out.println("User with userId " + userId +
                                " is already a member of UserGroup " +
                                        newUserGroup.getName());
                        userGroupAlreadyExists = true;
                    }
                } catch (Exception e) {
                    // Print cause, but continue
                    System.out.println(e.getLocalizedMessage());
                }

                if (!userGroupAlreadyExists) {
                    newUserGroup = usergroupsoap.addUserGroup(
                            groupName, groupDesc);
                    System.out.println("Added user group named " + groupName);

                    long users[] = {userId};
                    userSoap.addUserGroupUsers(newUserGroup.getUserGroupId(),
                            users);
                }

                // Get the user's user groups
                usergroups = usergroupsoap.getUserUserGroups(userId);

                System.out.println("User groups for userId " + userId + " ...");
                for (int i = 0; i < usergroups.length; i++) {
                    System.out.println("\t" + usergroups[i].getName());
                }
            }
            catch (Exception e) {
                e.getLocalizedMessage();
            }
        }

            private static URL _getURL(String remoteUser, String password,
                            String serviceName, boolean authenticate)
                            throws Exception {

                    // Unauthenticated url
                    String url = "http://localhost:8080/api/axis/" + serviceName;

                    // Authenticated url
                    if (authenticate) {
                            url = "http://" + remoteUser + ":" + password
                                            + "@localhost:8080/api/axis/"
                                            + serviceName;
                    }

                    return new URL(url);
            }

    }

Running this client should produce output like this:

    userId for user named test is 10196
    User groups for user 10196 ...
    java.rmi.RemoteException: No UserGroup exists with the key {companyId=10154,
    name=MyUserGroup}
    Added user group named
    Added user to user group named MyUserGroup
    User groups for user 10196 ...
        MyUserGroup

The output tells you the user had no groups, but was added to the user group
`MyUserGroup`.

You might be thinking, "But an error was thrown! Something is wrong!" Yes, an 
error is thrown (`java.rmi.RemoteException:`), but you can sit here as cool as 
an ice cream sandwich all the same. The exception is thrown because the 
`UserGroup` check is invoked before the `UserGroup` is created. Because the very 
next line of the output says `Added user group named...`, you're okay. The SOAP 
web service invocations worked! 

Here are a few things to note about this example:

- Authentication is done using HTTP Basic Authentication, which isn't
  appropriate for a production environment since the password is unencrypted.
  It's simply used for convenience in this example. In production, you should
  use SSL. Refer to Liferay's
  [`portal.properties`](@platform-ref@/7.1-latest/propertiesdoc/portal.properties.html)
  file and look up the `company.security.auth.requires.https` and
  `web.server.protocol` properties for more information.
- The screen name and password are passed in the URL as credentials. 
- The name of the service (e.g. `Portal_UserGroupService`) is specified at the
  end of the URL. Remember that the service name can be found in the web service
  listing.

The operations `getCompanyByVirtualHost()`, `getUserIdByScreenName()`,
`getUserUserGroups()`, `addUserGroup()` and `addUserGroupUsers()` are specified
for the `-ServiceSOAP` classes `CompanyServiceSoap`, `UserServiceSoap` and
`UserGroupServiceSoap` in the WSDL files. Information on parameter types,
parameter order, request type, response type, and return type are conveniently
specified in the WSDL for each Liferay web service. It's all there for you! 

Next, you'll learn how to implement a web service client in PHP. 

## SOAP PHP Client [](id=soap-php-client)

You can write your client in any language that supports web services invocation. 
The following example code invokes the same operations as before, but uses PHP 
and a PHP SOAP client instead of Java: 

    <?php
        $userGroupName = "MyUserGroup2";
        $userName = "test";
        $clientOptions = array('login' => $userName, 'password' => 'test');

        // Add user group
        $userGroupClient = new 
            SoapClient(
                "http://localhost:8080/api/axis/Portal_UserGroupService?wsdl", 
                $clientOptions);
        $userGroup = $userGroupClient->addUserGroup($userGroupName,
            "This user group was created by the PHP client! ");
        print ("User group ID is $userGroup->userGroupId ");

        // Add user to user group
        $companyClient = new SoapClient(
            "http://localhost:8080/api/axis/Portal_CompanyService?wsdl",
            $clientOptions);
        $company = $companyClient->getCompanyByVirtualHost("localhost");
        $userClient = new SoapClient(
            "http://localhost:8080/api/axis/Portal_UserService?wsdl",
            $clientOptions);
        $userId = $userClient->getUserIdByScreenName($company->companyId,
            $userName);
        print ("User ID for $userName is $userId ");
        $users = array($userId);
        $userClient->addUserGroupUsers($userGroup->userGroupId, $users);

        // Print the user groups to which the user belongs
        $userGroups = $userGroupClient->getUserUserGroups($userId);
        print ("User groups for user $userId ... ");
        foreach($userGroups as $ug)
            print ("$ug->name, $ug->userGroupId ")
    ?>

Remember, you can implement a web service client in any language that supports 
SOAP web services. 

## Related Topics [](id=related-topics)

[Service Security Layers](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/service-security-layers)

[Creating Remote Services](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/creating-remote-services)

[Invoking Remote Services](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/invoking-remote-services)

[What is Service Builder?](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/what-is-service-builder)
