# Using the WAB Generator [](id=using-the-wab-generator)

You can create applications for @product@ as Java EE-style Web Application
ARchive (WAR) artifacts or as Java ARchive (JAR) OSGi bundle artifacts. Some
portlet types, however, limit your flexibility. Portlets like Spring MVC and JSF
must be packaged as WAR artifacts because their frameworks are designed for Java
EE. Therefore, they expect a WAR layout and require Java EE resources such as
the `WEB-INF/web.xml` descriptor.

Liferay provides a way for these WAR-styled plugins to be deployed and treated
like OSGi modules by Liferay's OSGi runtime. They can be converted to *WABs*.

@product@ supports the OSGi Web Application Bundle (WAB) standard for deployment
of Java EE style WARs. Simply put, a WAB is an archive that has a WAR layout and
contains a `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF` file with the `Bundle-SymbolicName` OSGi
directive. A WAB is an OSGi bundle. Although the project source has a WAR
layout, the artifact filename may end with either the `.jar` or `.war`
extension.

Liferay only supports the use of WABs that have been auto-generated by the WAB
Generator. The WAB Generator transforms a traditional WAR-style plugin into a
WAB during deployment. So what exactly does the WAB Generator do to a WAR file
to transform it into a WAB?

The WAB Generator detects packages referenced in the plugin WAR's JSPs,
descriptor files, and classes (in `WEB-INF/classes` and embedded JARs). The
descriptor files include `web.xml`, `liferay-web.xml`, `portlet.xml`,
`liferay-portlet.xml`, and `liferay-hook.xml`. The WAB Generator verifies
whether the detected packages are in the plugin's `WEB-INF/classes` folder or in
an embedded JAR in the `WEB-INF/lib` folder. Packages that aren't found in
either location are added to an `Import-Package` header in the WAB's
`META-INF/MANIFEST.MF` file. 

To import a package that is only referenced in the following types of locations,
you must add an `Import-Package` OSGi header to the plugin's
`WEB-INF/liferay-plugin-package.properties` file and add the package to that
header's list of values.

-   Unrecognized descriptor file
-   Custom or unrecognized descriptor element or attribute
-   Reflection code
-   Classloader code

The WAB folder structure and WAR folder structure differ. Consider the following
folder structure of a WAR-style portlet:

- my-war-portlet
    - src
        - main
            - java
            - webapp
                - WEB-INF
                    - classes
                    - lib
                    - resources
                    - views
                    - faces-config.xml
                    - liferay-display.xml
                    - liferay-plugin-package.properties
                    - liferay-portlet.xml
                    - portlet.xml
                    - web.xml

When a WAR-style portlet is deployed to Liferay and processed by the WAB
Generator, the portlet's folder structure is transformed to something like this

- my-war-portlet-that-is-now-a-wab
    - META-INF
        - MANIFEST.MF
    - WEB-INF
        - classes
        - lib
        - resources
        - views
        - faces-config.xml
        - liferay-display.xml
        - liferay-plugin-package.properties
        - liferay-portlet.xml
        - portlet.xml
        - web.xml

The major difference is the addition of the `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF` file. The WAB
Generator automatically generates an OSGi-ready `MANIFEST.MF` file. If you want
to affect the content of the manifest file, you can place bnd directives and
OSGi headers directly into your plugin's `liferay-plugin-package.properties`
file. It's pointless to add a `bnd.bnd` file or a build-time plugin (e.g.,
`bnd-maven-plugin`) to your WAR plugin, because the generated WAB cannot use of
them.

Do you want to try generating a WAB? Follow the steps below to see the WAB
Generator in action.

1.  Create a WAR-style plugin that follows a similar structure to the one
    outlined above. You can download an example WAR-style portlet
    [here](https://dev.liferay.com/documents/10184/656312/com.liferay.hello.user.jsf.portlet-1.0-SNAPSHOT.war),
    for demonstration.

2.  Open your @product@ instance in a file explorer and add a
    `portal-ext.properties` file with the following properties:

        module.framework.web.generator.generated.wabs.store=true
        module.framework.web.generator.generated.wabs.store.dir=${module.framework.base.dir}/wabs

    These properties store your generated WAB into your Liferay instance's
    `osgi/wabs` folder. You can learn more about these properties in the
    [Module Framework Web Application Bundles](@platform-ref@/7.1-latest/propertiesdoc/portal.properties.html#Module%20Framework%20Web%20Application%20Bundles)
    properties section. Restart Liferay to use these properties.

3.  Copy your WAR plugin in your Liferay instance's `deploy` folder.

4.  Navigate to your Liferay instance's `osgi/wabs` folder and inspect the
    generated WAB.

Awesome! You've seen the WAB Generator in action!

## Related Topics [](id=related-topics)

[Generating a JSF Application](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/generating-a-jsf-application)

[Customizing the Product Menu](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/customizing-the-product-menu)

[Configuration](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-1/configuration)
