# Setting Up Maven [](id=setting-up-maven)

This tutorial explains how to install and configure Maven and Nexus. Nexus is a
Maven repository management server. Using Nexus for Maven repository management
is convenient but not required. Once you've installed and configured Maven (and,
optionally, Nexus) in your development environment, you'll be ready to install
the Liferay plugin artifacts which enable you to develop Liferay plugins with
Maven. 

You should be aware that one of our technical writers was recently reading Edgar
Allen Poe's The Raven, and adapted some of his verses for our Maven
documentation. Read all of the tutorials to follow the story of our fictional
protagonist's cat, Lenore II, who was introduced in our introduction to Maven.

## Installing Maven [](id=installing-maven)

"Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of computer desk once more;
Then, upon the velvet falling, I betook to Maven installing..."

You can download Maven from <http://maven.apache.org/download.cgi>. Putting your
Maven installation's `bin` directory in your system's `$PATH` facilitates
running the Maven executable (`mvn`) from your command prompt. 

The following sections explain the types of repositories you can use with Maven
projects and how to use them. 

## Understanding Maven Repositories [](id=understanding-maven-repositories)

Wouldn't it be nice to install and deploy your Liferay artifacts to a
repository? Great news! Maven lets you install your artifacts both to local and
remote repositories. This means that you can share Maven repositories privately
with your team or with the public. Your *local* repository holds your downloaded
artifacts and the artifacts you install to it. *Remote* repositories are for
sharing artifacts either privately (e.g., within your development team) or
publicly. To learn more about using artifact repositories see
<http://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-repositories.html>. 

Maven also lets you configure a proxy server; it mediates your requests to
public Maven repositories and caches artifacts locally. Using a local
proxy/repository helps you build projects faster and more reliably. You want
this for two reasons: accessing remote repositories is slower, and remote
repositories are sometimes unavailable. Most Maven proxy servers can also host
private repositories that hold only your private artifacts. If you're interested
in running your repository behind a proxy, see
<http://books.sonatype.com/nexus-book/reference/install.html>. 

Now that you've been introduced to Maven repositories and proxy servers, you may
want to consider using a repository management server to create and manage your
Maven repositories. 

## Managing Maven Repositories [](id=managing-maven-repositories)

You'll frequently want to share Liferay artifacts and plugins with teammates, or
manage your repositories using a GUI. You might find Sonatype Nexus to be a
valuable tool for managing your repositories. It's a Maven repository management
server that facilitates creating and managing release servers, snapshot servers,
and proxy servers. Release servers hold software that has met the software
provider's criteria for planned features and quality. Snapshot servers hold
software that is in a state of development. If you're not interested in using
Nexus as a repository management server, feel free to skip this section. 

To create a Maven repository using Nexus, first download Nexus from
<http://www.sonatype.org/nexus/> and follow instructions at
[http://www.sonatype.com/books/nexus-book/reference/\_installing\_nexus.html](http://www.sonatype.com/books/nexus-book/reference/_installing_nexus.html)
to install and start it. If you're using Windows, you must start Nexus from a
command prompt with administrator privileges.

To create a repository using Nexus, follow these steps: 

1.  Open your web browser; navigate to your Nexus repository server (e.g.,
    <http://localhost:8081/nexus>) and log in. The
    default username is `admin` with password `admin123`. 

2.  Click on *Repositories* and navigate to *Add...* &rarr; *Hosted Repository*. 

    ![Figure 2.20: Adding a repository to hold your Liferay artifacts is easy with Nexus OSS.](../../images/maven-nexus-create-repo.png)

    **Note:** To learn more about each
    type of Nexus repository, read Sonatype's *Managing Repositories* at
    <http://www.sonatype.com/books/nexus-book/reference/confignx-sect-manage-repo.html>.

3.  Enter repository properties appropriate for the type of artifacts it will
    hold. If you're installing release version artifacts into the repository,
    specify *Release* as the repository policy. Below are example repository
    property values: 
    - **Repository ID:** *liferay-releases*
    - **Repository Name:** *Liferay Release Repository*
    - **Provider:** *Maven2*
    - **Repository Policy:** *Release*

4.  Click *Save*.

You just created a Maven repository accessible from your Nexus OSS repository
server! Congratulations! 

It's also useful to create a Maven repository to hold snapshots of each Liferay
plugin you create. Creating a *snapshot* repository is almost identical to
creating a *release* repository. The only difference is that you specify
*Snapshot* as its repository policy:

1.  Go to your Nexus repository server in your web browser.

2.  Click on *Repositories* and navigate to *Add...* &rarr; *Hosted Repository*.

3.  Specify repository properties like the following:
    - **Repository ID:** *liferay-snapshots*
    - **Repository Name:** *Liferay Snapshot Repository*
    - **Provider:** *Maven2*
    - **Repository Policy:** *Snapshot*

4.  Click *Save*.

Voila! You not only have a repository for your Liferay releases (i.e.,
`liferay-releases`), you also have a repository for your Liferay plugin
snapshots (i.e., `liferay-snapshots`). 

Next, you can configure your new repository servers in your Maven environment to
enable you to install artifacts to them. 

## Configuring Local Maven Settings [](id=configuring-local-maven-settings)

Before using your repository servers and/or any repository mirrors, you must
specify them in your Maven environment settings. Your repository settings enable
Maven to find the repository and get access to it for retrieving and installing
artifacts. 

+$$$

**Note:** You only need to configure a
repository server if you're installing downloaded Liferay CE/EE artifacts from
a zip file or if you want to share artifacts (e.g., Liferay artifacts and/or
your plugins) with others. If you're automatically installing Liferay CE
artifacts from the Central Repository and aren't interested in sharing
artifacts, you don't need a repository server specified in your Maven settings.

However, configuring a mirror in your Maven settings is recommended as a best
practice. Get more information on mirrors and their purpose in Maven's guide on
mirrors at <http://maven.apache.org/guides/mini/guide-mirror-settings.html>. 

$$$

To configure your Maven environment to access your `liferay-releases` repository
server, do the following:

1.  Navigate to your `[USER_HOME]/.m2/` directory. Create that directory if it
    doesn't yet exist. 

2.  Open your `settings.xml` file. If it doesn't yet exist, create it. 

3.  Provide settings for your repository servers. Here are contents from a
    `settings.xml` file that has `liferay-releases` and `liferay-snapshots`
    repository servers configured: 

        <?xml version="1.0"?>
        <settings>
            <servers>
                <server>
                    <id>liferay-releases</id>
                    <username>admin</username>
                    <password>admin123</password>
                </server>
                <server>
                    <id>liferay-snapshots</id>
                    <username>admin</username>
                    <password>admin123</password>
                </server>
            </servers>
        </settings>

+$$$

**Note:** The username `admin` and
password `admin123` are the credentials of the default Nexus OSS administrator
account. If you changed these credentials for your Nexus server, make sure to
update `settings.xml` with these changes.

$$$

Now that your repositories are configured, they're ready to receive all the
Liferay Maven artifacts you'll download and the Liferay plugin artifacts you'll
create!

## Related Topics

[Developing with the Plugins SDK](develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/plugins-sdk)
[Developing Plugins with Liferay IDE](develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/liferay-ide)

