# Calling Liferay Services [](id=calling-liferay-services)

Every service provides a local interface to clients running in the same JVM as
Liferay Portal. These are called by use of the  -`ServiceUtil` classes. These
classes mask the complexity of service implementations. The core Liferay
services that are provided as part of Liferay Portal were generated by the same
Service Builder tool that we used in our project. Let's invoke a Liferay service
using its `-ServiceUtil` class. The following JSP code snippet demonstrates how
to get a list of the most recent bloggers from an organization. 

    <%@ page import="com.liferay.portlet.blogs.service.BlogsStatsUserLocalServiceUtil" %>
    <%@ page import="com.liferay.portlet.blogs.util.comparator.StatsUserLastPostDateComparator" %>
    ...
    <%@
    List statsUsers = BlogsStatsUserLocalServiceUtil.getOrganizationStatsUsers(
        organizationId, 0, max, new StatsUserLastPostDateComparator());
    %>

This JSP code invokes the static method `getOrganizationStatsUsers()` from the
`-LocalServiceUtil` class `BlogsStatsUserLocalServiceUtil`. 

In addition to the services you create using Service Builder, your portlets can
also access a variety of services built into Liferay. These include the
following services:

- `UserService` - for accessing, adding, authenticating, deleting, and updating
  users. 
- `OrganizationService` - for accessing, adding, deleting, and updating
  organizations. 
- `GroupService` - for accessing, adding, deleting, and updating groups.
- `CompanyService` - for accessing, adding, checking, and updating companies.
- `ImageService` - for accessing images.
- `LayoutService` - for accessing, adding, deleting, exporting, importing, and
  updating layouts. 
- `PermissionService` - for checking permissions.
- `UserGroupService` - for accessing, adding, deleting, and updating user
  groups. 
- `RoleService` - for accessing, adding, unassigning, checking, deleting, and
  updating roles. 

For more information on these services, see the Liferay Portal CE Javadocs at
[http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.1/javadocs/](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.1/javadocs/)
or the Liferay Portal EE Javadocs included in the Liferay Portal EE
Documentation `.zip` file that you can download from the Customer Portal on
[http://www.liferay.com](http://www.liferay.com). 

Next, you'll learn how to give Liferay portal instructions, or *hints*, for
presenting your entity models in your portlet's view. 
