# Repository Types

By default, Liferay stores documents and media files on the file system of the
server on which it's running. You can choose a specific location for the
document library store's root directory by adding the following property to your
`portal-ext.properties` file and replacing the default path with your custom
path:

    dl.store.file.system.root.dir=${liferay.home}/data/document_library

You can also use an entirely different method for storing documents and media
files. You can use any of the following documents and media library stores with
Liferay:

- Advanced File System Store
- CMIS Store (Content Management Interoperability Services)
- DBStore (Database Storage)
- File System Store
- JCRStore (Java Content Repository)
- S3Store (Amazon Simple Storage)

For example, you can store documents and media files in your Liferay instance's
database using DBStore. To enable DBStore, add the following line to your
`portal-ext.properties` file:

    dl.store.impl=com.liferay.portlet.documentlibrary.store.DBStore

Remember to restart your Liferay server after updating your
`portal-ext.properties` file in order for your customizations to take effect.
Please refer to the Document Library Portlet section of your `portal.properties`
file to find a complete list of supported customizations. You can customize
features such as the maximum allowed size of documents and media files, the list
of allowed file extensions, which types of files should be indexed, etc.

## Using External Repositories

Content Management Interoperability Services (CMIS) is a specification for
improving interoperability between Enterprise Content Management systems.
Documents and Media allows users to connect to multiple third-party repositories
that support CMIS 1.0 with AtomPub and Web Services protocols.

Some of the features supported with third-party repositories include:

- Reading/writing documents and folders
- Document check-in, check-out, and undo check-out
- Downloading documents
- Moving folders and documents within the repository
- Getting revision history
- Reverting to revision

There are some subtle differences in setting up the different kinds of
third-party repositories for use in Documents and Media. But there are plenty of
similarities too.

Common Liferay configuration steps:

- Adjust the portal properties.
- Add any user accounts required by the repository.
- Add the repository.

Lastly, keep in mind your third-party repository may require installation and
deployment of an appropriate Liferay plugin. Plugins for SharePoint and
Documentum are available through Liferay's Marketplace.

Let's go through those steps, starting with setting our portal properties.

### Adjusting portal properties

The admin must ensure that the same credentials and authentication are being
used in Liferay and in the external repository. This is normally synchronized
using a mechanism like LDAP. If you don't have LDAP, you need to ensure manually
that the credentials and authentication are the same. In order to authenticate
with the third-party repository, you need to store passwords for the user
sessions. Set the following portal property in your `portal-ext.properties`:

    session.store.password=true

Next, we need to make sure the login and password for Liferay are the same as 
the external repository. This is easily accomplished by using identical screen 
names, so in `portal-ext.properties` add the following: 

    company.security.auth.type=screenName

Alternatively, configure these properties in the Control Panel under *Portal 
Settings* &rarr; *Authentication*.

### Adding required repository users

Once these properties are set, you must create a user in Liferay with a
screen name and password matching the administrative user of your external
repository. Be sure to assign appropriate roles (e.g. Administrator) to that
user. Sign out of Liferay and sign in again as that new user. See sections of
the *Management* chapter on adding and managing users.

### Adding the repository

You can add new repositories from the UI by clicking the *Add* button from the
Home folder. Repositories can only be mounted in the Home folder.

Figure x: You can add a new repository by navigating to *Add* &rarr; *Repository* in the Documents and Media portlet.

All fields in this form are required, except for *Repository ID*. Leave this
field blank, and a repository ID is automatically generated by the system. When
finished, the repository is displayed on the left side of the window in the Home
folder.

Using this information, we can now add an example repository.