# Configuring Your Permissions Scheme [](id=configuring-your-permissions-scheme)

Liferay's permissions system is composed of several components. The main
component is a configuration file that really could have any name, but by
convention is called `default.xml` in plugin applications. This configuration
file is the heart of your permissions scheme, as it defines the permissions you
want inside your application. All the permissions checks that go into the code
derive their permission definitions from this file. Think of it as the Borg
queen that directs the rest of the drones to do its bidding. 

![Figure 1: The permissions configuration file is at the heart of Liferay's permissions system.](../../images/liferay-permissions.png)

To implement permissions, you perform three straightforward steps: 

1. You implement your permissions scheme in `default.xml` and tell your
application where it's configured. 

2. Optionally but as a best practice, you implement helper classes to check for
permissions. 

3. You wrap user interface elements in permission checks, so that they only
appear when a particular user is authorized to use them. 

There is another step you'll implement later: when you use Service Builder to
generate remote SOAP and JSON-based interfaces, you'll need to add permission
checks to them, as the UI is no longer a factor. But we'll get to that later. 

The next step is to define your permissions. 

## Defining Permissions for Your Application [](id=defining-permissions-for-your-application)

The first thing you need to do to begin defining your permissions is point your
application at the configuration file you'll use to define those permissions. 

1. In your application's `src` folder, create a file called
   `portlet.properties`. This file lets you define properties for your application
   in key/value pairs. 

2. In this file, place the following property: 

        resource.actions.configs=resource-actions/default.xml

This property defines the name and location of your permissions definition file.
You can, of course, call it anything you want. By convention, Liferay calls this
file and places it in a folder called `resource-actions` inside the `src` folder
of the plugin project, so by doing it this way, you're just following the
Liferay convention. 

Next, you'll create the file itself: 

1.  Create a folder called `resource-actions` in your `src` folder. 

2.  Create a new file in this folder called `default.xml`. 

3.  Add the following DOCTYPE declaration to the top of the file: 

        <?xml version="1.0"?>
        <!DOCTYPE resource-action-mapping PUBLIC "-//Liferay//DTD Resource Action Mapping 6.2.0//EN"
    	"http://www.liferay.com/dtd/liferay-resource-action-mapping_6_2_0.dtd">

If you have a copy of Liferay's source code, you'll find the DTD for this file
in the `definitions` folder. The DTD is fully documented and explains every tag
you can place in this file. If you want a complete reference for every option,
please look at the DTD. Here, you'll create a configuration that works for the
guestbook application. Before you place anything in the file, however, you
should think about the security model for your application. What exactly do you
want to protect, and from whom? To determine that, you should look at your
application's user interface. 

![Figure 2: Determine your application's security by looking at its user interface.](../../images/guestbook-security.png)

In the image above, you can see three areas where you might want to protect data
with a security check. Two of them are outlined in red, because they have to do
with `Guestbook`s, while the *Add Entry* button is outlined in blue, because it
has to do with `Entry` entities. What are the security rules you want for these
functions? 

Certainly, you want only people with elevated permissions to access the
functionality for adding a guestbook. The owner(s) of the site should really be
the only person/people adding guestbooks. Similarly, site owners may want to
make certain guestbooks available only to a certain group of users. That means
when you're building the tab bar, you'll have to check each guestbook to make
sure the current user has permission to view it. 

Finally, the *Add Entry* button deserves some consideration. When site
administrators place the Guestbook portlet on a page, by default, who should
have permission to add entries? You can go one of two ways on this: you can allow
anybody, even guest users, to add entries, or you can make it so that a user
must be logged in to add entries. For the purposes of this Learning Path, you'll
configure the permissions to allow site members to post, but not guests. Once
you see how easy this is to configure, you can change it later if you want it to
work the other way around. 

To summarize: 

- The *Add Guestbook* button should be available only to administrators. 

- The Guestbook tabs should be filtered by permissions in case administrators
  have limited who can see them. 

- The *Add Entry* button should be available only to site members. 

Now you're ready to create your permissions configuration. The configuration
file is divided into two sections: portlet permissions and various model
permissions sections, depending on the entities you have in your application.
The easiest one to configure is the portlet permissions, so you'll start with
that. 

1.  Place the following wrapper tags into your `default.xml` file: 

        <resource-action-mapping>

        </resource-action-mapping>

    All the rest of the permissions configuration is placed inside these tags. 

2.  Next, place the portlet permissions between the `<resource-action-mapping/>`
    tags: 

        <portlet-resource>
            <portlet-name>guestbook</portlet-name>
            <permissions>
                <supports>
                    <action-key>ADD_TO_PAGE</action-key>
                    <action-key>CONFIGURATION</action-key>
                    <action-key>VIEW</action-key>
                </supports>
                <site-member-defaults>
                    <action-key>VIEW</action-key>
                </site-member-defaults>
                <guest-defaults>
                    <action-key>VIEW</action-key>
                </guest-defaults>
                <guest-unsupported />
            </permissions>
        </portlet-resource>

    This configuration defines the default permissions for the portlet itself.
    This is the application window in which the Guestbook appears. You're
    defining three different permissions: `ADD_TO_PAGE`, `CONFIGURATION`, and
    `VIEW`. Below that, you give site members and guests the `VIEW` permission
    by default. As you can see, this is an easy and straightforward way to
    define permissions. 

3.  Place the model package permissions in the file next: 

        <model-resource>
            <model-name>com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model</model-name>
            <portlet-ref>
                <portlet-name>guestbook</portlet-name>
            </portlet-ref>
            <permissions>
                <supports>
                    <action-key>ADD_GUESTBOOK</action-key>
                    <action-key>ADD_ENTRY</action-key>
                </supports>
                <site-member-defaults>
                    <action-key>ADD_ENTRY</action-key>
                </site-member-defaults>
                <guest-defaults />
                <guest-unsupported>
                    <action-key>ADD_GUESTBOOK</action-key>
                    <action-key>ADD_ENTRY</action-key>
                </guest-unsupported>
            </permissions>
        </model-resource> 

    This configuration defines the default permissions at a global level for
    your entities. You create two permissions: `ADD_GUESTBOOK` and `ADD_ENTRY`.
    Site members can add entries by default, while guests can't do anything. They
    can, however, view the application (and thus the data it is displaying),
    because you gave them that permission in the `<portlet-resource/>` section
    above. 

4.  Next, place the permissions for the `Guestbook` entity in the file: 

        <model-resource>
            <model-name>com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Guestbook</model-name>
            <portlet-ref>
                <portlet-name>guestbook</portlet-name>
            </portlet-ref>
            <permissions>
                <supports>
                    <action-key>ADD_ENTRY</action-key>
                    <action-key>DELETE</action-key>
                    <action-key>PERMISSIONS</action-key>
                    <action-key>UPDATE</action-key>
                    <action-key>VIEW</action-key>
                </supports>
                <site-member-defaults>
                    <action-key>ADD_ENTRY</action-key>
                    <action-key>VIEW</action-key>
                </site-member-defaults>
                <guest-defaults>
                    <action-key>VIEW</action-key>
                </guest-defaults>
                <guest-unsupported>
                    <action-key>UPDATE</action-key>
                </guest-unsupported>
            </permissions>
        </model-resource>

    This is the most complicated permission scheme so far. You've defined five
    permissions, most of which are pretty straightforward, such as `DELETE`
    (permission to delete an entity), `UPDATE` (permission to modify an entity),
    `PERMISSIONS` (permission to change permissions of an entity), and `VIEW`
    (permission to view an entity). The `ADD_ENTRY` permission, however, is not
    so straightforward, at least at first. But think about it: do you have to
    have permission to view a Guestbook in order to add an entry to it? Yes.
    Therefore, the default permission configuration should reflect that. 

5. Finally, place the permissions for the `Entry` entity in the file: 

        <model-resource>
            <model-name>com.liferay.docs.guestbook.model.Entry</model-name>
            <portlet-ref>
                <portlet-name>guestbook</portlet-name>
            </portlet-ref>
            <permissions>
                <supports>
                    <action-key>DELETE</action-key>
                    <action-key>PERMISSIONS</action-key>
                    <action-key>UPDATE</action-key>
                    <action-key>VIEW</action-key>
                </supports>
                <site-member-defaults>
                    <action-key>VIEW</action-key>
                </site-member-defaults>
                <guest-defaults>
                    <action-key>VIEW</action-key>
                </guest-defaults>
                <guest-unsupported>
                    <action-key>UPDATE</action-key>
                </guest-unsupported>
            </permissions>
        </model-resource>

    These permissions are the same as for the `Guestbook` entity, except for the
    `ADD_ENTRY` permission. This completes your permission configuration. 

Great job! You've now successfully designed and implemented a permissions scheme
for your application. In the next part, you'll implement supporting Java code:
code to support permissions (called *resources* on the back end) and helper
classes for checking permissions. 
